Over the short-term the collapse probably resulted in an improved standard of living for a peasant population suddenly relieved of the burden of supporting a hierarchy (cf. Sanders 1973).
In the long run, though, the agricultural population was itself decimated.
The fact that there was no population recovery seems to indicate that the Lowlands environment had deteriorated under intensification, and/or that the intensive agricultural systems could be maintained only with the hierarchical management that was by now proven infeasible.
As archaeologists are beginning to realize, while this was a political and demographic disaster of the greatest magnitude, it was not the end of Mayan Civilization.
The Northern Maya Lowlands were not affected by the southern collapse, and indeed grew in strength.
It now appears that
there was much cultural continuity between the Southern Lowlands and the Puuc sites and even Chichen Itza to the north.
The major transformation in Mayan Civilization came with the demise of Chichen Itza, and the rise of Mayapan, in the thirteenth century (Freidel 1985; Andrews and Sabloff 1986).
The Chacoan collapse
Chacoan society of the San Juan Basin of northwestern New Mexico is known only from its archaeological remains.
In contrast to the tropical setting of the Mayan area, the San Juan Basin is an and region.
Social complexity in this area evolved in response to a very different set of challenges, but collapsed for reasons that parallel those of the cases already investigated.
The San Juan Basin is a structural subunit of the vast Colorado Plateaux.
Its 85,000 square kilometers consist of broad plains, sharply and frequently dissected by mesas and buttes of relatively low relief.
It is surrounded by mountains and plateaux of high relief.
Topographic elevation over short distances, in the central Basin, rarely exceeds 150 meters, while relief of 900 meters at the periphery is not uncommon (Judge 1982: 8; Powers 1984: 23).
In the center of the San Juan Basin lies its major topographic feature, Chaco Canyon.
An east-west trending feature bounded on north and south by sharply rising cliffs, Chaco Canyon is an island of topographic relief and environmental variety in a sea of topographic homogeneity and environmental redundancy (cf. Judge et al.
The Canyon has several major tributary drainages, and so receives moisture from an extensive drainage basin.
This is crucial for agriculture in an and setting, for with characteristic spatial variability in localized summer rains, it is common to see some Canyon drainages running while others are dry.
Chaco Canyon thus maximizes the potential for capturing runoff from variable (and often insufficient) precipitation, and is unusual in the Basin in this regard (Judge et al.
In other ways, though, Chaco Canyon is not a good location for subsistence agriculture.
It has, for example, some of the poorest soils in the region (Powers et al.
Schelberg 1982: 105).
The maize of the Hopi of northeastern Arizona takes about 115 to 120 days to mature (Schelberg 1982: 16).
Southwestern archaeologists often use these figures to estimate whether any given area can support maize agriculture.
The average growing season for the San Juan Basin is between 140 and 160 days (Judge 1982: 8).
Yet at the elevation of Chaco Canyon, 1866 meters, 60 percent of growing seasons are less than 120 days, and 30 percent are less than 100 days.
The only permanent water in the Canyon consists of about a dozen small seeps in the sandstone cliffs, the largest of which holds less than 380 liters.
Recorded rainfall in Chaco averages 213 millimeters, but varies from 89 to 457 millimeters (Schelberg 1982: 16, 79, 81, 87).
Climatic conditions at the height of the Canyon's occupation were similar to those of today (Powers et al.
Dendrological (tree-ring) evidence suggests that between 900 and 1300 A.D. rainfall averaged 221 millimeters.
Temporal and spatial variations were critical in such a moisture-deficient area, and droughts adversely affected the Chacoans.
Between 920 and 1040 A.D., in 45 percent of years precipitation was greater than the 100 year mean.
Between 1040 and 1120, this figure increased to 55 percent of years.
Yet between 1120 and 1180 only 10 percent of all years experienced precipitation above the 100 year mean.
From 1123 to 1178 A.D. only eleven years saw above-average precipitation (Schelberg 1982: 16, 95).
A regional system of social complexity, political stratification, and economic symbiosis developed in this marginal environment on a scale unparalleled in the
prehistoric northern Southwest.
Although research is beginning to disclose the existence of regional systems that existed at other times and other places in the Puebloan area (e.g., Upham 1982; Plog 1983), the Chacoan system reached a level of hierarchy, complexity, and costliness that exceeded all others.
The demarcating attribute of the Chacoan system is its architecture.
Two generalized kinds of Chacoan structures have been characterized by archaeologists.
The first, called `Great Houses,' `Chacoan Structures,' or `Towns,' are distinctive among Southwestern pueblos.
They are: (a) characteristically large compared with surrounding buildings (sometimes reaching several hundred rooms, and including multiple stories); (b) the result of large-scale planning, exhibiting large construction units, an ordered, compact, symmetrical layout, and a high level of labor organization; (c) characterized by a distinctive, elaborate form of masonry that was costly to construct; (d) filled with large, high-ceilinged rooms that were roofed with large timbers; and (e) associated with a distinctive form of religious architecture called the Great Kiva.
Contrasting with these comparatively few Chacoan buildings are hundreds of small pueblos or villages that held the bulk of the Basin population.
These pueblos are small and amorphous; they exhibit unplanned layouts, simpler masonry, smaller rooms with lower ceilings, and smaller, less elaborate kivas (Powers et al.
1983: 15-17; see also Vivian 1970; Marshall et al.
The overall costliness of their construction, as Neller has demonstrated, was substantially lower than that of Great Houses (Lester and Neller 1978).
Chacoan structures (Great Houses) typically contain a large number of what appear to have been storage rooms, and would accordingly have had populations that were
proportionately low compared to structure size (Judge 1979: 903; Marshall et al.
1979: 337-9; Schelberg 1982: 223).
The burials in Chacoan Structures in the Canyon are often associated with exotic, imported goods, including turquoise beads and pendants, shell ornaments, decorated ceramic vessels, jet inlays, quartz crystals, and other valuable items.
Sometimes such grave associations number in the hundreds or thousands of items.
Village burials, in contrast, are far less frequently associated with valuable materials.
Between 1030 and 1150 A.D., for example, 21 percent of Canyon Great House burials had turquoise beads, but less than one percent of village interments did (Schelberg 1982: 158-86; Akins and Schelberg 1984).
The evidence for labor mobilization and high energy expenditure in Great House architecture, and for social and economic differentiation in mortuary practices, identifies Chacoan society as socially stratified, with the higher status members of the population resident in the Great Houses (Schelberg 1982, 1984; Tainter and Gillio 1980;
Powers 1984; cf. Cordy 1981; Tainter 1978).
The distribution of Chacoan towns, both in the Canyon and throughout the San Juan Basin, demarcates the geographical extent of this system of hierarchical organization.
Great Houses range in size from 1 to nearly 700 rooms (Powers et al.
The largest sites concentrate in and near Chaco Canyon, with a few along or near the San Juan River at the north edge of the Basin.
The other Great Houses, scattered primarily about the periphery of the Basin and along the lower Chaco River , are generally referred to as `Chacoan Outliers' (Marshall et al.
1979; Powers et al.
More than 70 of these have been identified (Schelberg 1982: 7).
A road network spread outward from Chaco Canyon to the Outliers.
These roads are wide (up to 9-10 meters) and straight.
They do not adhere to topographic contours, but were imposed on the landscape.
The roads often contain masonry curbs, causeways over drainages, and, at cliff faces, carved stairways (Lyons and Hitchcock 1977).
Recent research indicates that they were not merely the result of habitual use, but were systematically planned, engineered, constructed, and maintained (Nials 1983).
More than 300 kilometers of such roads have been identified so far (Schelberg 1982: 209).
A few Outliers seem to have served as way-stations associated with this road network (Marshall et al.
1979; Powers et al.
1983: 325), although the majority of Great Houses served as residences of high status individuals and descent groups in local agricultural communities (Tainter and Gillio 1980: 105; Schelberg 1984;
Powers 1984).
The archaeological chronology of the San Juan Basin is as follows (after Schelberg 1982):
Developing social complexity is evident in the San Juan Basin as early as the Basketmaker III and Pueblo I periods.
Great Kivas make their first appearance at this time in and around the region (Schelberg 1982: 11, 126-7, 144).
(Great Kivas are large religious structures that probably served several groups.)
From this early period Chaco maintained extensive trading relations with surrounding areas.
Between 20 and 80 percent of the earliest ceramics were traded into
Chaco from the Cibola area 80 kilometers to the southwest.
Later, during Pueblo II, major quantities of decorated pottery came from the Red Mesa Valley, 50 kilometers to the south, and much utility ware from the Chuska Mountains, 80 kilometers to the west.
By the ninth century A.D. Chaco Canyon supported a sizeable population of small, independent pueblos, characterized by irregular masonry and unstructured ground plans (Judge 1979: 901-2; H. Toll 1984, and personal communication).
Around 900 A.D. major changes began.
Three Canyon sites - Una Vida, Pueblo Bonito, and Penasco Blanco - began to develop the large rooms and multi-storied, distinctive masonry that characterizes later Great Houses (Judge et al.
By early Pueblo III at least 13 Great Houses were occupied in or near the Canyon.
Several Great Kivas were concurrently built, and a water control system established (Vivian 1970).
Luxury items were imported for use by the Great House elites, including turquoise, ocean shell, copper bells, macaws, and parrots (Mathien 1984).
Elsewhere in the San Juan Basin the period between 500 and 900 A.D. witnessed the establishment of agricultural villages in many areas that came later to support Outliers.
Between 900 and 975 seven Chacoan structures were built along the southern and western edges of the Basin (Powers et al.
1983: 247), as sociopolitical hierarchies evolved in response to localized challenges, stresses, and opportunities (Tainter and Gillio 1980: 108-9).
The South Road leading out of the Canyon dates to the same time as these early Outliers (Kincaid et al.
1983), indicating integration between Chaco and its southern periphery.
Between 975 and 1050 initial construction began at another nine Chacoan structures.
There was a florescence of construction during the next century, when 19 Great Houses were built.
Yet after this final flurry construction dramatically declined.
The last building date from a Great House is 1132 A.D., from Pueblo Alto overlooking Chaco Canyon (Powers et al.
By the later periods of the Chacoan system there is pronounced evidence for regional economic integration.
Some
150,000 to 200,000 trees were imported to roof the Canyon Great Houses.
For the Canyon site of Chetro Ketl an estimated 5122 roofing timbers were cut between 1037 and 1039 A.D. An additional 4108 were felled in 1051 and 1052.
Of 26,000 trees needed to build Chetro Ketl, 6,000 were fir obtained from high elevations at least 50 kilometers away.
The remainder were pine from mountains at least 25 kilometers distant.
Between 1020 and 1120 A.D., an estimated 40,500 pottery vessels were imported from the Chuska Mountains to one Canyon site alone (Pueblo Alto) (Schelberg 1982: 8, 206, 219).
What may have been even more important was the contents of these vessels.
Research suggests that the population of the Canyon, at its peak, was between 4400 and 10,000 persons.
Estimates of local environmental productivity indicate that at least some of these could not have been supported by adjacent agricultural lands or local faunal resources.
The maize cobs from Pueblo Bonito, one of the major Canyon Great Houses, average 25 percent larger than those of other Canyon sites, suggesting that the elite residents of this site relied on imported maize.
At another Great House, Pueblo Alto, archaeologists have found a greater variety of plant species than at the villages, suggesting greater access to outside resources.
Many stone tools, and raw materials for these, were imported (Schelberg 1982: 109-21;
Cameron 1984; Akins 1984; M. Toll 1984).
By the mid-to-late twelfth, or early thirteenth, century the Chacoan system had essentially collapsed.
Population remnants hung on in the Canyon and other Basin areas, but Great House building was a thing of the past.
Construction was either at village sites, or small, village-sized rooms were abutted against existing Great Houses.
Masonry walls were often built with food-grinding implements scrounged from Great House trash.
The days were gone when
hierarchically mobilized labor forces shaped elaborate masonry into planned, symmetrical towns.
Chaco was no longer the center of the economic universe.
A late population in the region from 1225 to 1275 or 1300 may have had ties to the Mesa Verde region to the north.
After 1300 A.D. the region was essentially abandoned by agricultural peoples (Powers et al.
1983: 345; Schelberg 1982: 129-30, 274; Lekson 1984: 66, 69).
Assessment of the Chacoan collapse
By the tenth century A. D. population growth in the San Juan Basin region had reached the point where local groups no longer had the option to move into alternative territories when faced with subsistence stress.
Cultivation was thus forced into increasingly marginal lands (Judge et al.
Where population density is high, and where population units are territorially constrained, it becomes necessary to ensure access to the produce of larger territories to guard against the effects of such things as localized droughts, frosts, and raids.
This is especially so in an environment where conditions of moisture, soil quality, and growing season are so marginal for agriculture.
In discussing the Maya it was suggested that regional economic symbiosis (spatial energy averaging) is advantageous under such circumstances, and often develops where there is sufficient environmental diversity.
San Juan Basin populations had greater opportunity to develop such a system than did the Lowland Maya.
As a consequence, although both the Mayan and Chacoan societies developed along somewhat similar paths of increasing complexity followed by collapse, they did so under very different driving forces.
The San Juan Basin, as noted, is a topographically homogeneous, dry, featureless plain (Cordell 1982; Judge et al.
1981; Powers et al.
1983; Tainter and Gillio 1980).
There is lower diversity and abundance of flora and fauna in the central Basin than at its margins (Cordell 1982: 61;
Powers et al.
1983: 293; Powers 1984).
For a territorially constrained population in Chaco Canyon, surrounded by the dry, redundant Basin floor, the most advantageous exchange relationships would have been with groups at the well-
watered, high diversity lands at the Basin edge (Tainter and Gillio 1980: 110).
In the northern Southwest, as Kent Lightfoot has noted (as cited by Plog [1983: 300; and personal communication]), there is a tendency toward an inverse relationship between the agricultural productivity of high and low elevation terrain.
In warm, dry years there is little precipitation in lower elevations, but sufficient moisture, with a long growing season, in high elevations.
In cool, wet years the pattern is reversed: better moisture conditions for lowland planting, but a shorter growing season at highland agricultural areas.
Such a pattern would have encouraged exchange relationships between Basin interior and Basin margin populations.
Not surprisingly, from at least Basketmaker III times Chaco Canyon populations did trade extensively with such outlying areas (Judge 1979: 901-3).
For populations throughout the Basin, maximum insurance against productivity fluctuations would be gained by establishing economic access to territories as diverse as possible.
Herein, though, lies a problem.
If each local group had to allocate resources toward the tasks of identifying potential trading partners, identifying these partners' yearly production levels, and establishing reciprocal economic relations with each, the duplication of administrative costs by hundreds of local groups would have been enormous.
These costs were substantially reduced when the regional population jointly supported a single administration that served the economic needs of all groups.
Additional advantages to hierarchical management of regional economic symbiosis were: providing for equitable distribution of resources, thereby reducing competition and conflict;
providing authority to requisition surpluses from those groups that had one, necessary when economic exchanges were imbalanced, or balance might be delayed; centralized pooling to serve a large, diverse territory; support of specialists whose role was to monitor surpluses and deficits throughout the region (i.e., to process information).
Situated as it was at the center of the San Juan Basin, Chaco Canyon was the most efficient, least-cost location from which to administer a Basin-wide energy averaging system.
The presence of the largest Chacoan towns, with rich luxury goods, high status burials, and a variety of imports, coupled with the convergence of the regional road system, suggest that Chaco did indeed emerge as the administrative center of a Basin-wide system of hierarchical social and economic integration.
A three-level economic hierarchy appears to have operated in the Basin.
Elites resident in Outliers mediated the participation of local agricultural villages in the system, and interacted directly with the regional elites resident in Canyon Great Houses.
Resources exchanged up and down through this hierarchy would have included: agricultural crops, firewood, building materials, animal products, wild plant products, stone and pottery, and such extra-Basin resources as cotton, salt, and turquoise (Powers et al.
1983: 301-2; Powers 1984; Schelberg 1982: 9-10, 198-200, 1984; Tainter and Gillio 1980: 104-9).
If our present understanding of the Chacoan system is correct, it would seem that the population of the San Juan Basin obtained a valuable return on its investment in complexity by lowering the administrative cost, and
increasing the effectiveness, of an energy averaging system.
Beyond its initial establishment, however, further expansion of this system may not have been so advantageous.
In the Early Pueblo II period, as described, Outliers were located primarily at the productive, high diversity terrain of the Basin margins.
These early Great Houses were situated an average of 54 kilometers apart.
In Late Pueblo II Outliers continued to be established at the Basin periphery, but a few also began to be built elsewhere.
With the increase in number of Outliers, the mean distance between them dropped to 31 kilometers, with an average of 10 kilometers between five Outliers at the southwestern perimeter of the Basin.
In Early Pueblo III the geographical pattern of Outlier development shifted.
A few new ones were established on the periphery, but most appeared north of the San Juan River and in the San Juan Basin interior.
Mean distance between Outliers declined to 17 kilometers.
This distance was only 12 kilometers between Outliers that were road-connected.
The Chacoan system ca.
1100 A.D. was at its height, but on the eve of collapse.
In Late Pueblo III the number of occupied Outliers declined substantially (to 17), while the mean distance between these increased to 26 kilometers Many of those that survived to this period were located north of the San Juan River, suggesting that the economic center of gravity had shifted at least partially from Chaco Canyon to points north (Powers et al.
The later development of the Chacoan system illuminates the process of collapse.
Late trends, particularly in the Early Pueblo III period, include: increasing numbers of Outliers, each requiring the construction of a Great House;
a spurt of building activity in the Chacoan towns of the Canyon itself, which doubled labor requirements (Lekson 1984: 60, 62); increasing functional specialization of architecture (Powers et al.
1983: 326); decreasing mean distance between Outliers; increasing establishment of Outliers in the low productivity, low diversity interior of the Basin.
This combination of trends increased the overall cost of the Chacoan system at the same time that it reduced its effectiveness.
With declining distance between Outliers, more and more Chacoan Towns were established that experienced productivity cycles similar to their ever-closer neighbors.
As participants in the energy averaging system became spatially closer, their productivity fluctuations grew increasingly synchronized.
After enough Outliers had been established in the region to maximally exploit its environmental diversity, the addition of each new one reduced the overall effectiveness of the system.
This problem became particularly acute in the Early Pueblo III period.
The establishment of increasing numbers of Outliers in the low diversity Basin interior (Powers et al.
Doyel et al.
1984) exacerbated the problem.
This marginal, low productivity environment offered diversity as its best characteristic.
The Chacoans initially made wise use of this feature, but came ultimately to dilute its effectiveness.
An energy averaging system is most effective
when adding a new participating community means increasing the diversity and/or productivity of the regional exchange pool.
The Chacoans initially pursued such a strategy.
Increasingly, though, communities were added that did not augment the system's diversity, and that actually caused deterioration in the ratio of communities/diversity.
Such communities created a drag on the efficient operation of the network.
Incorporating communities from the Basin interior made this problem considerably worse than it might otherwise have been, for such areas intrinsically had less to contribute to regional well-being.
The florescence of Great House architectural construction in the Early Pueblo III period in Chaco Canyon may have been stimulated by the availability of enlarged labor pools from the addition of so many new participants in the system, and by increased storage requirements to serve these participants.
Indeed, much of the late building was devoted to storage space (Lekson 1984: 66).
This building boom, however, came at a very inopportune time, when the overall efficiency of the regional system was declining.
It is possible to see, then, that the Chacoan system, established initially to provide subsistence security for a regional population, came eventually to experience a declining marginal return on investment in complexity.
With the establishment of ever more Outliers, in closer and closer proximity, and in increasingly unfavorable settings, the major resource of the system - diversity - was diluted.
The overall effectiveness of the network deteriorated.
The result was that later Chacoan communities realized a proportionately lower advantage when some region experienced a surplus, and proportionately less could be distributed to each community experiencing a deficit.
This deterioration coincided with a period of significantly increased investment in architectural construction.
The net result was that Chacoan communities of the San Juan Basin, around 1100 A.D., derived less subsistence security at higher cost than had their ancestors of 100 to 150 years previously.
Faced with such a declining marginal return they began to withdraw from the regional network, leading to the weakening of the system and its ultimate collapse.
It was no coincidence that the most densely packed Outlier communities, those at the southern edge of the Basin, may have been the first to withdraw from the network (perhaps in the later eleventh century) (Gauthier, Acklen, and Stein 1977: 24).
Their loss would have been detrimental to the system as a whole, for this area contained some of the most productive agricultural land in the Basin (Powers et al.
Lacking true coercive force, the Canyon administrators could not enforce participation, and as the number of participating Outliers dwindled those that were left were probably the weaker ones, less able to survive on their own, with less to contribute to the regional pool.
It is possible that the collapse of Chacoan society was partially a consequence of its success.
By increasing subsistence security and reducing natural checks on population, the Chacoan system allowed regional population to rise to a level that would otherwise have never been attained.
As a result, increasingly marginal lands had to be taken in for agriculture, and for incorporation into the exchange network.
Outliers were established in precarious areas that could produce little surplus for export (Doyel et al.
1984: 44, 48, 49), but even these small surpluses may have been necessary.
The great investment, during the later Chacoan era, in building storage rooms at Great Houses (Lekson 1984: 66) indicates increased concern with subsistence insecurity and the possibility of temporary
food shortages.
This costly investment in a low-return payoff is a classic example of a declining marginal return.
A final blow may have been administered by a severe, prolonged drought from 1134-81 A.D. (Powers et al.
345; Schelberg 1982: 273).
Some archaeologists believe this drought caused the Chacoan collapse.
The Chacoans had, however, previously survived droughts in the mid tenth, the early eleventh, and the late eleventh centuries without collapsing (Schelberg 1982: 273; Powers et al.
This final drought does not seem, then, to be a sufficient reason for the system's demise.
The Canyon inhabitants did have alternatives for dealing with the 1134-81 drought.
Among the strategies they could have pursued are: military mobilization of the labor forces at their disposal, leading to forced participation of target communities in the Basin network, or even to conquest of other populations and imposition of tribute (the energy subsidy strategy); digging walk-in wells and practicing pot irrigation; or importing water for crops, pot by pot or (watertight) basket by basket, from the Basin margins.
Specialists in Southwestern prehistory will find these alternatives farfetched.
I agree; they are indeed.
I raise them because it is interesting to discuss why they seem farfetched.
None of these was technically impossible; the Chacoans could have attempted any of these strategies.
They did not do so because of the extreme cost.
The marginal return for any of these practices was simply too low.
It
was not that the Canyon inhabitants had no alternatives; they simply had no economical ones.
Sociopolitical collapse was preferable from an economic viewpoint.
In this case, what the Chacoans did not do illustrates the thesis of this work as clearly as what they did.
What the final drought may have accomplished was to change the curve of marginal return on investment in complexity from a smoothly to a sharply declining one, and so to hasten the end.
The drought did not cause the collapse.
Given the trends in marginal productivity that the Chacoans faced, this complex society would have ultimately collapsed with or without the final drought.
Evaluation
The three cases examined in this chapter were significantly different in sociopolitical structure, level of complexity, economy, territorial extent, and evolutionary trend, and in details of their respective collapses.
They were located in contrasting environments, and are known to us from very different data sources.
And yet the collapse of each may be understood by the same general principles.
The collapses of these societies cannot be understood solely by reference to their environments and subsistence practices (or to changes in these), to the pressure of outside peoples, to internal conflict, to population growth, to catastrophes, or to sociopolitical dysfunction.
What affected the Romans, Maya, and Chacoans so adversely was how one or more of these factors was related to the cost/benefit ratio of investment in complexity.
When challenges and stresses caused this ratio to deteriorate excessively, or coincided with a declining marginal return, collapse became increasingly likely.
The Roman collapse
The Romans established an empire that was paid for largely by the monetary subsidy of successive conquests.
Captive peoples financed further subjugations, until the Empire grew to the point where further expansion was exceedingly costly and decreasingly profitable.
As windfalls from new conquests ceased to pour into the treasury, the administration and defense of the Empire had to be covered primarily out of yearly agricultural production.
This proved to be both insufficient for the maintenance of the Empire, and costly to the support population.
A strategy that at first yielded a high marginal return became, by the time of Augustus, an increasing burden, so that most emperors faced problems of fiscal insufficiency.
The Empire, nevertheless, provided conditions of relative peace and prosperity through the first two centuries A.D. It might be argued, then, that although by this time the marginal return on investment in empire had declined, it had not yet declined to the point where continuation of that investment was not worthwhile.
Serious stress surges, in the form of barbarian incursions, began to affect the Empire in the mid second century A.D., and increasingly thereafter.
Unable to bear the cost of meeting these challenges out of yearly productivity, the emperors adopted a strategy of artificially inflating the value of their yearly budgets by debasing the currency.
This shifted the cost of current crises to future taxpayers.
Such a strategy assumes that the future will experience no equivalent crisis.
When this assumption proved grossly in error, the existence of the Empire was imperiled.
A series of escalating crises from the third through the fifth centuries, both internal and external, proved increasingly detrimental to the welfare of the State.
The costs of meeting these crises fell on a decimated support population.
By debasing the currency, increasing taxes, and imposing stringent regulations on the lives of individuals, the Empire was, for a time, able to survive.
It did so, however, by vastly increasing its own costliness, and in so doing decreased the marginal return it could offer its population.
These costs drained the Empire's peasantry so thoroughly that population could not recover from outbreaks of plague, producing lands were abandoned, and the ability of the State to support itself deteriorated.
As a result, the barbarian incursions of the late fourth and fifth centuries were increasingly successful and devastating.
The burden and costliness of the Empire not only increased over time, but the benefits it afforded its members declined.
As crops were confiscated for taxation and peasant's children sold into slavery, lands were increasingly ravaged by barbarians who could not be halted with the Empire's resources.
The advantage of empire declined so precipitously that many peasants were apathetic about the dissolution of Roman rule, while some actively joined the invaders.
In being unable to maintain an acceptable return on investment in complexity, the Roman Empire lost both its legitimacy and its survivability.
The Germanic kingdoms that succeeded Roman rule in the West were more successful at resisting invasions, and did so at lower levels of size, complexity, permanent military apparatus, and costliness.
This indicates a significant development: with the fall of the Roman Empire, the marginal return on investment in complexity increased significantly in Western Europe.
The Mayan collapse
The Preclassic and Classic Maya of the Southern Lowlands were a densely packed, territorially constrained people, bounded by ocean, by highlands, and by other populations.
Colloquially, it is tempting to describe the prehistoric Lowlands as like a sealed cauldron, where population growth, and the lack of an external outlet, produced a tense, pressurized atmosphere in which Mayan communities could do little but turn on each other.
By the last few centuries B.C. population pressure in some parts of the Lowlands had reached the point where a variety of stress responses developed.
These included cultivation of marginal lands, agricultural intensification, the development of sociopolitical hierarchies and public architecture, and predation on neighbors to counter resource fluctuations.
While many factors were involved in the development of Mayan Civilization, several features of that civilization seem to have been at least partly shaped by competition and warfare.
Conflict, raiding, and the consequent insecurity among the rural population selected for aggregation into the more secure political centers.
The resulting increases in local resource pressure, coupled with the indefensible nature of scattered swidden plots, gave further impetus to the development of intensive agricultural systems such as raised fields and terraces.
Such systems were not only more productive per unit of land, they were also relatively compact, defensible, and worth defending.
Once warfare became a serious threat in the Lowlands, agricultural and military strategy evolved in concert.
Both, in turn, further encouraged social and economic stratification.
Personnel needs for warfare, agriculture, and monumental construction may in turn have led the elites to encourage further population growth.
Monumental architecture and public art are normal characteristics of a civilization, but among the Maya they seem to have served a special purpose.
Once warfare had developed throughout the region, avoiding or forestalling attack became a major consideration.
The external trappings of Mayan Civilization helped to achieve this by: (a) signaling the wealth of polities and the relative population pools on which they could draw (as Mayan art and architecture still do to this day); (b) attracting unaffiliated populations by the promise of strength and security; and (c) communicating unequivocally to visitors a center's successes at warfare and its treatment of prisoners.
This investment in visual display helped to compensate for the lack of significant standing military forces.
It was, however, costly.
While other peoples have been economically devastated when locked into an escalating campaign of military preparedness, the Maya became trapped in what may be called an `art race.'
This, and the other consequences of military competition, were as detrimental to their economy and support population as investment was for the Romans in real military power.
The Mayan peasantry supported, for a period exceeding a thousand years, an upwardly-spiraling system of interlinked responses to demographic and political pressures.
These responses included monumental construction, agricultural intensification, conflict, and support of elite hierarchies, military and civil specialists, and an artisan class.
This investment appears to have brought no increased subsistence security per capita, for the health and nutritional status of the population was low, and deteriorated throughout the Classic period.
The Late
Classic hierarchy imposed an expanded building program on a weakened, undernourished population.
With such an unfavorable, and deteriorating, marginal return on investment in complexity, the collapse of the southern Classic Maya was to be expected.
The Chacoan collapse
Chacoan society of the American Southwest may, like the Romans, have attempted too much of a good thing.
An early system of energy averaging made good use of the San Juan Basin's best characteristic - diversity - by means of a hierarchical network of economic linkages that was centered in Chaco Canyon.
By use of this network the effects of such things as a shift in rainfall from the San Juan River (at the northern edge of the Basin) to the Red Mesa Valley (at the southern edge), an early frost near the Chuska Mountains (on the west), or a raid by one's neighbors in any area, could be distributed among all the Basin's communities.
By participating in this network, each local group could insure itself against the fluctuating, unpredictable climate of this and land, thereby increasing subsistence security, and accommodating a growing population.
In effect, the scale of the production and consumption unit was raised from the local group, occupying a restricted area, to the regional population, occupying a diversified territory.
Any community that linked itself to this regional pool was able to average its yearly productivity by contributing surplus produce in good years, and receiving support from the hierarchy when local productivity faltered.
For a time, when newly established, such a system can increase its effectiveness by adding new participants who increase the pool of regional diversity.
The Chacoans initially pursued such a strategy, as Outlier communities were incorporated from the high diversity, high productivity Basin edge.
In time, though, communities came to be added that increasingly duplicated the resource bases of existing members, that were situated in poorer, less
productive areas, and that ultimately came to be located in the low diversity Basin floor itself.
The result was that, as the ratio of communities/diversity deteriorated, so also did the effectiveness of the network.
As proportionately fewer communities differed in their productivity cycles, the system's ability to fulfill its main purpose of buffering productivity fluctuations declined.
The more densely packed communities in the productive southern Basin lands saw that opportunity and security lay elsewhere, and withdrew from the network.
This weakening and decline in effectiveness coincided with a major construction boom.
The regional population, weakened in its subsistence security, was asked to support increased investments in complexity that were no longer bringing increased marginal returns.
Within a few decades, construction ceased and Chacoan society collapsed.
Conclusions
A number of observations about the collapse process emerge from this chapter:
In each of the cases examined, the costliness of complexity increased over time while benefits to the population declined.
In each case, substantially increased costs occurred late, shortly before the collapse, and these were imposed on a population already weakened by the previous pattern of declining marginal returns.
For Rome and the Maya, population leveled off or declined before the collapse, and the well-being of most people deteriorated.
This seems to have come about from the demands of supporting such complex systems.
It is not currently known whether something similar happened in the Chacoan case, but it is noteworthy that the number of Outliers participating in this system dropped prior to the final collapse.
Quite possibly Outlier communities, whose participation could not be enforced (unlike the Roman and Mayan cases), withdrew from the network before declining marginal productivity adversely affected their local populations.
For the Maya and Chacoans, subsequent abandonment of their territories, and the lack of a substantial reoccupation by agricultural peoples, suggests that there was environmental deterioration during the period of growth.
This may indicate that pressures of population on resources had more to do with the Mayan and Chacoan collapses than with that of Rome.
The Roman
case is very different, for the later Empire was decidedly underpopulated.
In each case, peoples on the periphery (the northern European barbarians, the northern Maya, and the Western and Eastern Pueblos) rose to prominence after the older society had collapsed.
None of these cases can be completely understood by the explanations commonly advanced for them.
The fall of Rome was not due to barbarians, for the Empire was economically, organizationally, and militarily stronger than its besiegers.
And it was not due to internal weaknesses, for the Empire remained essentially intact for a period of several hundred years.
Rome's collapse was due to the excessive costs imposed on an agricultural population to maintain a far-flung empire in a hostile environment.
The fall of the Maya was not due to peasant revolt, for peasants supported this civilization for over 1000 years.
It was not due to invasions, for which there is unclear evidence and uncertain causality, nor to agricultural deterioration, for the evidence of agricultural intensification indicates that the Maya were fully capable of increasing the productivity of their environment.
The collapse of Maya Civilization was due to the burdens of an increasingly costly society borne by an increasingly weakened population.
Peasant dissatisfaction, foreign pressures, internal conflict, or an agricultural crisis may have provided a final, insurmountable challenge, but such a challenge was effec tive only because the Maya were following a course that made them vulnerable to collapse.
The Chacoan collapse was not due to drought or to environmental deterioration, for these were factors with which the Chacoans were technically capable of dealing, and indeed had previously done so.
The regional population of the San Juan Basin chose not to continue participating in the Chacoan network, nor to rise to the challenge of the final drought, because the costs of doing so had grown too high in comparison to the advantages conferred.
Collapse and migration were economically preferable.
This chapter began with the observation that the framework for explaining collapse could probably not be subjected to a formal, quantitative test.
The alternative was to investigate three cases in detail, asking whether the framework developed in Chapter 4 helps us to understand why these societies collapsed.
The results lead us to answer the question affirmatively: the collapses of the Western Roman Empire, the Southern Lowland Maya, and Chacoan society can be understood as responses to declining marginal returns on investment in complexity.
