Whatever crops were brought in had to be sold for taxes, even if it meant starvation for the farmer.
Under conditions of famine it was the farmers, amazingly enough, who were the first to suffer, often flocking to cities that held stores of grain.
It is little wonder that the peasant population failed to recover.
The collection of taxes and rents was so unvarying
that, however poor the crop, the amount due was seized even if the cultivators were left without enough.
People couldn't meet taxes and so were jailed, sold their children into slavery, or abandoned their homes and fields.
Circumstances were highly unfavorable for the formation of large families.
Under these conditions the cultivation of marginal land became unprofitable, as too frequently it would not yield enough for taxes and a surplus.
Hence, lands came to be progressively deserted.
Faced with taxes, a small holder might abandon his land to work for a neighbor, who in turn would be glad of the extra agricultural labor.
A patronage system developed wherein powerful local land-holders extended protection over peasants against the government's demands.
The government legislated unsuccessfully against this source of lost revenue.
It was not only the countryside that suffered.
Toward the end of his reign Constantius II (337-61) appropriated the landed endowments of cities.
All local services now had to be financed by city magistrates, upon whom the burden was hereditary.
Julian (360-3) restored land rents and taxes to cities, but these were reconfiscated under Valentinian I (364-75) and Valens (364-78).
A few years later a portion was refunded for public building repair.
In Gaul of the later Empire cities contracted, sometimes to the size of the Celtic villages from which they had earlier sprung (Rostovtzeff 1926: 465, 470-1; Boak 1955: 33, 58, 112, 125; A. Jones 1964: 68, 131, 146, 455, 465, 755-6, 773-6, 810- 12, 819, 822, 1043-4, 1974: 18, 82-8, 130, 135-6; Heichelheim 1970: 332; MacMullen 1976: 100-1, 170, 173, 209).
The system established by Diocletian involved rigid control of individuals and their output.
Each citizen, each
guild, and each locality was expected to produce needed essentials for the survival of the Empire.
For a time the Empire did indeed survive, but at a cost of the progressive abandonment of land, declining agricultural yields, depopulation of the countryside, and impoverishment of the cities.
As different occupations competed for personnel, military strength declined until finally barbarians were relied on to staff the army.
When Attila was defeated in Gaul in 451 it was by a federation of local Germanic kingdoms, not by Roman arms.
Taxes in the later Empire continued to be crushing.
Although Valens stopped their rise in the East, and later reduced them somewhat, in the West under co-Emperor Valentinian II taxes were still too heavy.
His successor, Valentinian III, publicly admitted in 444-5 that additional taxes on landowners or merchants would be devastating.
Even still, he was forced in 444 to impose a 1/24 sales tax, which required that all sales be conducted in the presence of a tax collector.
In the early fifth century in the West there were widespread revolts (in 417, 435-7, and 442), which had to be suppressed by the military.
Delinquent taxes were remitted occasionally in the early and middle fourth century, but so frequently after 395 that a general agricultural breakdown in the West seems indicated.
Contemporary records indicate that, more than once, both rich and poor wished that the barbarians would deliver them from the burdens of the Empire.
While some of the civilian population resisted the barbarians (with varying degrees of earnestness), and many more were simply inert in the presence of the invaders, some actively fought for the barbarians.
In 378, for example, Balkan miners went over en masse to the Visigoths.
In Gaul the invaders were sometimes welcomed as liberators from the Imperial burden, and were even invited to occupy territory.
To ensure the doubtful
loyalty of frontier areas, the government was on occasion forced to make up local deficits of grain.
Zosimus, a writer of the second half of the fifth century A.D., wrote of Thessaly and Macedonia that `...as a result of this exaction of taxes city and countryside were full of laments and complaints and all invoked the barbarians and sought the help of the barbarians' (quoted in Mazzarino [1966: 65]).
`[B]y the fifth century,' concludes R. M. Adams, `men were ready to abandon civilization itself in order to escape the fearful load of taxes' (1983: 47).
The decreased manpower and wealth of the Western Empire helped contribute to the military successes of the invaders.
In turn, the military disasters of the West further weakened its finances.
In the mid fifth century the West was gradually lost.
Areas like Spain and Africa were temporarily or permanently lost to the barbarians.
Substantial tax remissions had to be given to the areas devastated by the invasions.
In 439 the Vandals took Carthage, which had supplied grain to the city of Rome.
There were widespread breakdowns in civil services.
In the 20 years following the death of Valentinian III (455 A.D.), the Roman Army proper dwindled to nothing.
The recruiting ground shrank to Italy itself.
The government came to rely almost exclusively on barbarian troops.
When finally these could not be paid they demanded land in Italy instead.
This being refused, they mutinied, elected Odoacer their king, and deposed the last Emperor of the West.
Romulus Augustulus, in 476.
Although this is the official date for the end of the Western Empire, in fact most of the provinces had been lost years before.
One small section of Gaul remained under Roman administration until annexed by the Franks in 486.
The Germanic kings initially maintained approximately the
same civil administration they found in the conquered lands, for this was the only administration they knew.
In Italy the Senate continued to meet under Odoacer and Theoderic.
But even these vestiges of the Empire disappeared within a few years (Gibbon 1776-88: 1238, 1254- 5, 1301; Dill 1899: 237-40; Frank 1940: 303-4; Boak 1955: 52; A. Jones 1964: 147-8, 190, 201, 204-6, 243-4, 247-8, 253, 812, 826, 1059-61, 1974: 82, 84, 88; Levy 1967: 99; Heichelheim 1970: 300; Isaac 1971: 127; Weber 1976: 407; MacMullen 1976: 207).
Assessment of the Roman collapse
Whatever the stimulus for the Roman expansion - and this no doubt varied over time - it was for the conquerors a highly successful policy.
From the middle of the third century B.C. ever increasing quantities of gold and silver flowed into the Roman treasury.
The result was that the Roman people paid little or nothing for continuing conquests and for garrison costs.
The captive populations underwrote the cost of further expansion (A. Jones 1974: 114-15).
At this point in their history the Roman people were investing in a policy of territorial expansion (with associated rise in administrative costs), and reaped the return on that investment.
After the initial series of successes, the benefit/cost ratio for this policy was for a time spectacularly high.
It was an enterprise with a marginal return that was most favorable.
Inevitably, though, this high rate of return could not be maintained.
Three factors combine ultimately to lower the marginal return for any such policy.
First, the number of profitable conquests declines.
A geographically expanding state ultimately encounters a competitor with equivalent capabilities, whose conquest would be too expensive, if not impossible.
Rome met such a competitor in the Persian (Parthian, later Sassanian) Empire to the east.
Although in the many contests between these powers Rome generally came out best, Parthia was a long overland trek from the Mediterranean.
It had lengthy borders, external enemies of its own, and a potentially subversive population.
Trajan's conquest of parts of this empire was abandoned by Hadrian as too expensive to administer (Rostovtzeff 1926: 315).
On other fronts, if powers demanding respect are not found, an expanding polity is likely to meet populations whose
conquest would not bear the cost.
The Romans found such peoples on many fronts, such as the northern frontier with Germany.
Thus, the economics of territorial expansion dictate, as a simple matter of mathematical probability, that an expanding power will ultimately encounter a frontier beyond which conquest and garrisoning are unprofitable.
Secondly, the logistics of transport and communication dictate that, beyond a certain distance from the capital, lands will be difficult to govern.
For the Roman Empire this was especially the case the farther one traveled inland from the Mediterranean sea lanes.
The combined factors of increased costliness of conquest, and increased difficulty of administration with distance from the capital, effectively require that at some point a policy of expansion must end.
This was the state reached by the Roman Empire by the beginning of the current era.
Under Augustus the size of the Roman Empire was essentially capped.
Later additions were comparatively insignificant, and costly.
The conquests of Britain by Claudius, and of Dacia by Trajan, probably never paid for themselves, for these were poor, distant, frontier provinces (M. Hammond 1946: 75-6).
Thirdly, once the accumulated surpluses of conquered nations have been appropriated, a conqueror must thereafter incur costs to administer, garrison, and defend the province.
And when the accumulated surpluses have been spent, this must be paid for out of yearly income.
Costs rise and benefits decline.
For a one-time infusion of wealth from each conquered province, Rome had to undertake administrative and military responsibilities that lasted centuries.
For Rome, the costs of administering some provinces (such as Spain and Macedonia) exceeded their
revenues.
And although he was probably exaggerating, Cicero complained in 66 B.C. that, of all Roman conquests, only Asia yielded a surplus.
In general, most revenues were raised in the richer lands of the Mediterranean, and spent on the army in the poorer frontier areas such as Britain, the Rhineland, and the Danube (A. Jones 1974: 116, 127).
So the process of geographical expansion, if successful, yields a marginal return that initially is very high, but which inevitably begins to decline.
