By the time the conquest of the rich Mediterranean lands was completed, this was the situation in the Roman Empire.
An imperial administration that had been developed following the major influxes of wealth that were the benefits of conquest thereafter had to be supported by the Empire's yearly agricultural output.
The result was that under the Principate the Empire had to maintain a far-flung, inflexible administrative and military structure on the basis of variable agricultural output, and in the face of an increasingly hostile political environment.
The Roman Empire was the first state, and the only one until recent times, to maintain a standing military force sufficient for all its needs (A. Jones 1974: 135).
As a result, from Augustus on, the Empire regularly faced fiscal insufficiencies.
The Imperial budget was generally sufficient for the normal needs of the government, but stress surges required extraordinary fiscal measures.
Augustus' successors dealt with financial crises occasionally by selling their capital - Imperial lands and treasures.
This was obviously a limited solution.
The more common stratagem was to defer the true costs of government by debasing the currency.
This had the politically expedient advantage of shifting to some indefinite point in the future the cost of current crises.
The inflation that would inevitably follow would tax the future to pay for the
present, but the future could not protest.
Viewed from the perspective of history, it is clear that by the time of the Principate the marginal return on investment in empire had declined considerably from the level of the later Republic.
When the stresses impinging on the Empire grew, it would decline further still.
What had once been a windfall was becoming a burden.
The weaknesses of the Empire that were exposed when Marcus Aurelius confronted the Marcomanni proved nearly fatal during the succeeding crises.
The reduced marginal return on organizational investment left the Roman Empire without sufficient reserves to meet such emergencies.
The only alternatives were to raise taxes directly, or to raise them indirectly by debasement and inflation.
Both courses were adopted.
And yet the crises of civil war and barbarian incursions required increased expenditures that yielded no increased return.
The Empire was not expanded, no major booty was acquired, and there was no increase in agricultural output.
The increased costs of the third century were incurred merely to maintain the status quo.
Costs rose precipitously while benefits, at best, remained level.
Axiomatically, the marginal return on investment in empire declined.
This process intensified with the establishment of the Dominate during the reign of Diocletian.
In the third century taxation had become so heavy as to consume the capital resources of taxpayers (Boak 1955: 111).
In the fourth and fifth centuries it became even worse.
As the sizes of both the military and the civil administrations doubled, taxes had to be raised from a weakened Empire to foot the bill.
The effect on the support population, as described, was devastating.
The cost of saving the Empire was extremely high for a non-industrial population.
And as in the third century, payment of this cost yielded no increase in benefits.
Yet what happened during the fourth and fifth centuries was more than simply a further decline in the marginal return.
The Empire was by this time sustaining itself by the consumption of its capital resources: producing lands and peasant population.
Continued investment in empire was creating not only a drop in marginal output, but also a drop in actual output.
Where under the Principate the strategy had been to tax the future to pay for the present, the Dominate paid for the present by undermining the future's ability to pay taxes.
The Empire emerged from the third century crisis, but at a cost that weakened its ability to meet future crises.
At least in the West, a downward spiral ensued: reduced finances weakened military defense, while military disasters in turn meant further loss of producing lands and population.
Collapse was in the end inevitable, as indeed it had always been.
In Chapter 4 it was suggested that, when a complex society enters a situation of declining marginal returns, collapse can occur from one or both of two reasons: lack of sufficient reserves with which to meet stress surges, and alienation of the over-taxed support population.
The former was a clear problem faced by the Empire since at least the days of Marcus Aurelius, if not before.
The latter evidently became part of the Empire's problems under the Dominate, or possibly even during the third century crisis.
If accounts are to be believed, at least a portion of the overtaxed peasantry openly welcomed the relief they thought the barbarians would bring from the burdens of Roman rule.
And a much larger portion were evidently apathetic to the impending collapse.
It seems clear that the Empire had at least partially lost its legitimacy.
The costs of empire had risen dramatically, while in the face of barbarian
successes the protection that the State could offer to many of its citizens proved increasingly ineffectual.
To many, there were simply no remaining benefits to the Empire, as both barbarians and tax collectors crossed and ravaged their lands.
As Gunderson notes, ,...the net value of local autonomy exceeded that of membership in the Empire' (1976:
Complexity was no longer yielding benefits superior to disintegration, and yet it cost so much more.
The collapse yielded at the same time both a reduction in the costs of complexity and an increase in the marginal return on its investment.
The smaller, Germanic kingdoms that succeeded Roman rule in the West were more successful at resisting foreign incursions (e.g., Huns and Arabs) than had been the later Empire (Weber 1976: 389).
They did so, moreover, at lower administrative and military costs.
The economic prosperity of North Africa actually rose under the Vandals, but declined again tinder Justinian's reconquest when Imperial taxes were reimposed (Hodges and Whitehouse 1983: 28).
Thus the paradox of collapse: a drop in complexity brings with it a corresponding rise in the marginal return on social investment.
Two matters remain to be addressed: why the East survived when the West failed, and why the Empire did not develop the economic strength necessary to avoid collapse.
Three factors account for the continued survival of the East.
Two of these are that it was economically stronger than the West and strategically less vulnerable.
The provinces of the Eastern Empire included the older, more economically developed and populous parts of the Mediterranean world.
Such provinces were better able to bear the costs of defense and administration than those of the West.
It has been estimated that in the later Empire the budget of the West was only 1/3 that of the East.
