Chapter 6. Summary and Implications.
Every time history repeats itself the price goes up.
Message on a popular sign
Summary
Collapse is recurrent in human history; it is global in its occurrence; and it affects the spectrum of societies from simple foragers to great empires.
Collapse is a matter of considerable importance to every member of a complex society, and seems to be of particular interest to many people today.
Political decentralization has repercussions in economics, art, literature, and other cultural phenomena, but these are not its essence.
Collapse is fundamentally a sudden, pronounced loss of an established level of sociopolitical complexity.
A complex society that has collapsed is suddenly smaller, simpler, less stratified, and less socially differentiated.
Specialization decreases and there is less centralized control.
The flow of information drops, people trade and interact less, and there is overall lower coordination among individuals and groups.
Economic activity drops to a commensurate level, while the arts and literature experience such a quantitative decline that a dark age often ensues.
Population levels tend to drop, and for those who are left the known world shrinks.
Complex societies, such as states, are not a discrete stage in cultural evolution.
Each society represents a point along a continuum from least to most complex.
Complex
forms of human organization have emerged comparatively recently, and are an anomaly of history.
Complexity and stratification are oddities when viewed from the full perspective of our history, and where present, must be constantly reinforced.
Leaders, parties, and governments need constantly to establish and maintain legitimacy.
This effort must have a genuine material basis, which means that some level of responsiveness to a support population is necessary.
Maintenance of legitimacy or investment in coercion require constant mobilization of resources.
This is an unrelenting cost that any complex society must bear.
Two major approaches to understanding the origin of the state are the conflict and integration schools.
The former sees society as an arena of class conflict.
The governing institutions of the state, in this view, arose out of economic stratification, from the need to protect the interests of propertied classes.
Integration theory suggests, in contrast, that governing institutions (and other elements of complexity) emerged out of society-wide needs, in situations where it was necessary to centralize, coordinate, and direct disparate subgroups.
Complexity, in this view, emerged as a process of adaptation.
Both approaches have strong and weak points, and a synthesis of the two seems ultimately desirable.
Integration theory is better able to account for distribution of the necessities of life, conflict theory for surpluses.
There are definitely beneficial integrative advantages in the concentration of power and authority, but once established the political realm becomes an increasingly powerful influence.
In both views, though, the state is a problem-solving organization, emerging because of changed circumstances (differential economic success in the conflict view; management of societywide stresses in
integration theory).
In both approaches legitimacy, and the resource mobilization this requires, are constant needs.
Even though collapse has been a little understood process, that is not for lack of trying.
Collapse theorists have taken to heart the Maoist dictum to let a hundred schools of thought contend.
While there is a nearly incomprehensible diversity of opinions regarding collapse, these seem to boil down to a limited number of themes.
These themes suffer from a number of logical failings, so that none by itself is adequate.
Mystical explanations seem worst in this regard, being virtually without scientific merit.
Economic explanations are logically superior.
They identify characteristics of societies that make them liable to collapse, specify controlling mechanisms, and indicate causal chains between controlling mechanism and observed outcome.
Yet existing economic explanations offer no general approach that would allow the understanding of collapse as a global matter.
Except for the mystical theme, no existing approach is necessarily incorrect.
They are, as presently formulated, simply incomplete.
Four concepts lead to understanding collapse, the first three of which are the underpinnings of the fourth.
These are:
human societies are problem-solving organizations;
sociopolitical systems require energy for their maintenance;
increased complexity carries with it increased costs per capita; and 4.
investment in sociopolitical complexity as a problemsolving response often reaches a point of declining marginal returns.
This process has been illustrated for recent history in such areas as agriculture and resource production, information processing, sociopolitical control and specialization, and overall economic productivity.
In each of these spheres it has been shown that industrial societies are experiencing declining marginal returns for increased expenditures.
The reasons for this are summarized below.
To the extent that information allows, rationally acting human populations first make use of sources of nutrition, energy, and raw materials that are easiest to acquire, extract, process, and distribute.
When such resources are no longer sufficient, exploitation shifts to ones that are costlier to acquire, extract, process, and distribute, while yielding no higher returns.
Information processing costs tend to increase over time as a more complex society requires ever more specialized, highly trained personnel, who must be educated at greater cost.
Since the benefits of specialized training are always in part attributable to the generalized training that must precede it, more technical instruction will automatically yield a declining marginal return.
Research and development move from generalized knowledge that is widely applicable and obtained at little cost, to specialized topics that are more narrowly useful, are more difficult to resolve, and are resolved only at great cost.
Modern medicine presents a clear example of this problem.
Sociopolitical organizations constantly encounter problems that require increased investment merely to preserve the status quo.
This investment comes in such forms as increasing size of bureaucracies, increasing specialization of bureaucracies, cumulative organizational solutions, increasing costs of legitimizing activities, and increasing
costs of internal control and external defense.
All of these must be borne by levying greater costs on the support population, often to no increased advantage.
As the number and costliness of organizational investments increases, the proportion of a society's budget available for investment in future economic growth must decline.
Thus, while initial investment by a society in growing complexity may be a rational solution to perceived needs, that happy state of affairs cannot last.
As the least costly extractive, economic, information-processing, and organizational solutions are progressively exhausted, any further need for increased complexity must be met by more costly responses.
As the cost of organizational solutions grows, the point is reached at which continued investment in complexity does not give a proportionate yield, and the marginal return begins to decline.
The added benefits per unit of investment start to drop.
Ever greater increments of investment yield ever smaller increments of return.
A society that has reached this point cannot simply rest on its accomplishments, that is, attempt to maintain its marginal return at the status quo, without further deterioration.
Complexity is a problem-solving strategy.
The problems with which the universe can confront any society are, for practical purposes, infinite in number and endless in variety.
As stresses necessarily arise, new organizational and economic solutions must be developed, typically at increasing cost and declining marginal return.
The marginal return on investment in complexity accordingly deteriorates, at first gradually, then with accelerated force.
At this point, a complex society reaches the phase where it becomes increasingly vulnerable to collapse.
Two general factors can make such a society liable to collapse.
First, as the marginal return on investment in
complexity declines, a society invests ever more heavily in a strategy that yields proportionately less.
Excess productive capacity and accumulated surpluses may be allocated to current operating needs.
When major stress surges (major adversities) arise there is little or no reserve with which they may be countered.
Stress surges must be dealt with out of the current operating budget.
This often proves ineffectual.
Where it does not, the society may be economically weakened and made more vulnerable to the next crisis.
Once a complex society enters the stage of declining marginal returns, collapse becomes a mathematical likelihood, requiring little more than sufficient passage of time to make probable an insurmountable calamity.
So if Rome had not been toppled by Germanic tribes, it would have been later by Arabs or Mongols or Turks.
A calamity that proves disastrous to an older, established society might have been survivable when the marginal return on investment in complexity was growing.
Rome, again an excellent example, was thus able to withstand major military disasters during the Hannibalic war (late third century B.C.), but was grievously weakened by losses that were comparatively less (in regard to the size and wealth of the Roman state at these respective times) at the Battle of Hadrianople in 378 A.D. Similarly, the disastrous barbarian invasions of the first decade of the fifth century were actually smaller that those defeated by Claudius and Probus in the late third century (Dill 1899: 299).
Secondly, declining marginal returns make complexity an overall less attractive strategy, so that parts of a society perceive increasing advantage to a policy of separation or disintegration.
When the marginal cost of investment in complexity becomes noticeably too high, various segments increase passive or active resistance, or
overtly attempt to break away.
The insurrections of the Bagaudae in late Roman Gaul are a case in point.
At some point along the declining portion of a marginal return curve, a society reaches a state where the benefits available for a level of investment are no higher than those available for some lower level (see Fig.
Complexity at such a point is decidedly disadvantageous, and the society is in serious danger of collapse from decomposition or external threat.
Evaluating this approach against three of the best known instances of collapse (the Western Roman Empire, the Southern Lowland Maya, and the Chacoans) yields positive results.
The establishment of the Roman Empire produced an extraordinary return on investment, as the accumulated surpluses of the Mediterranean and adjacent lands were appropriated by the conquerors.
Yet as the booty of new conquests ceased, Rome had to undertake administrative and garrisoning costs that lasted centuries.
As the marginal return on investment in empire declined, major stress surges appeared that could scarcely be contained with yearly Imperial budgets.
The Roman Empire made itself attractive to barbarian incursions merely by the fact of its existence.
Dealing with stress surges required taxation and economic malfeasance so heavy that the productive capacity of the support population deteriorated.
Weakening of the support base gave rise to further barbarian successes, so that very high investments in complexity yielded few benefits superior to collapse.
In the later Empire the marginal return on investment in complexity was so low that the barbarian kingdoms began to seem preferable.
In an economic sense they were, for the Germanic kingdoms that followed Roman rule dealt successfully with stress surges of the kind that the late Empire had found overwhelming, and did so at lower cost.
The Maya of the southern Lowlands were a demographically stressed and territorially constrained people.
The requirements of management of agricultural intensification, organization for predation and defense, support of the hierarchy, and monumental construction all imposed on the Maya a costly system that brought no commensurate increase in subsistence security per capita.
The health and nutritional status of the population was low, and most likely due in part to the rising cost of supporting complexity, declined throughout the Classic period.
Late Classic increases in social costs came at a time of deteriorating conditions, so that the marginal return on investment in complexity left the Maya ripe for collapse.
In the American Southwest, the population of the San Juan Basin invested in hierarchy and complexity to reduce (through centralized management) the cost of a regional system of energy averaging.
For a time the marginal return on this investment was favorable, but as more communities were added the diversity and effectiveness of the economic system declined.
This weakening coincided with a major construction program, so that as the return on investment in complexity declined, the cost of that investment grew.
For all three cases, then, focusing on the marginal return curve of investment in complexity has clarified the collapse process, and has allowed us to see why each society was vulnerable.
Five major topics remain to be addressed.
These are: (1) further observations on collapse, and on the nature of the declining productivity of complexity; (2) application and extension of the concept; (3) implications for the further study of some of the cases discussed in Chapter 1; (4) subsuming other explanatory themes under declining marginal returns; and (5) implications for contemporary times and
for the future of industrial societies.
As promised in the first chapter, the definition of collapse will be completed here.
Collapse and the declining productivity of complexity We arrive in this section at one of the major implications of the study.
Most of the writers whose work has been considered seem to approve of civilizations and complex societies.
They see complexity as a desirable, even commendable, condition of human affairs.
Civilization to them is the ultimate accomplishment of human society, far preferable to simpler, less differentiated forms of organization.
An appreciation for the artistic, literary, and scientific accomplishments of civilizations clearly has much to do with this, as does the industrial world's view of itself as the culmination of human history.
Toynbee is perhaps most extreme in this regard, but he is by no means atypical.
Spengler, in his abhorrence of civilization and its sequelae, represents a minority view, as does Rappaport.
With such emphasis on civil society as desirable, it is almost necessary that collapse be viewed as a catastrophe.
An end to the artistic and literary features of civilization, and to the umbrella of service and protection that an administration provides, are seen as fearful events, truly paradise lost.
The notion that collapse is a catastrophe is rampant, not only among the public, but also throughout the scholarly professions that study it.
Archaeology is as clearly implicated in this as is any other field.
As a profession we have tended disproportionately to investigate urban and administrative centers, where the richest archaeological remains are commonly found.
When with collapse these centers are abandoned or reduced in scale, their loss is catastrophic for our data base, our museum collections, even for our
ability to secure financial backing.
(Dark ages are rarely as attractive to philanthropists or funding institutions.)
Archaeologists, though, are not solely at fault.
Classicists and historians who rely on literary sources are also biased against dark ages, for in such times their data bases largely disappear.
A less biased approach must be not only to study elites and their creations, but also to acquire information on the producing segments of complex societies that continue, if in reduced numbers, after collapse.
Archaeology, of course, has great potential to provide such information.
Complex societies, it must be emphasized again, are recent in human history.
Collapse then is not a fall to some primordial chaos, but a return to the normal human condition of lower complexity.
The notion that collapse is uniformly a catastrophe is contradicted, moreover, by the present theory.
To the extent that collapse is due to declining marginal returns on investment in complexity, it is an economizing process.
It occurs when it becomes necessary to restore the marginal return on organizational investment to a more favorable level.
To a population that is receiving little return on the cost of supporting complexity, the loss of that complexity brings economic, and perhaps administrative, gains.
Again, one is reminded of the support sometimes given by the later Roman population to the invading barbarians, and of the success of the latter at deflecting further invasions of western Europe.
The attitudes of the late Maya and Chacoan populations toward their administrators cannot be known, but can easily be imagined.
Societies collapse when stress requires some organizational change.
In a situation where the marginal utility of still greater complexity would be too low,
collapse is an economical alternative.
Thus the Chacoans did not rise to the challenge of the final drought because the cost of doing so would have been too high relative to the benefits.
Although the end of the Chacoan system meant the end of some benefits (as does the end of any complex system), it also brought an increase in the marginal return on organization.
The Maya, similarly, appear to have reached the point where evolution toward larger polities would have brought little return for great effort.
Since the status quo was so deleterious, collapse was the most logical adjustment.
One of the explanatory themes reviewed in Chapter 3 - the `failure to adapt' model - may now have its full weakness revealed.
Proponents of this view argue, in one form or another, that complex societies end because they fail to respond to changed circumstances.
This notion is clearly obviated: under a situation of declining marginal returns collapse may be the most appropriate response.
Such societies have not failed to adapt.
In an economic sense they have adapted well - perhaps not as those who value civilizations would wish, but appropriately under the circumstances.
What may be a catastrophe to administrators (and later observers) need not be to the bulk of the population (as discussed, for example, by Pfeiffer [1977: 469-71]).
It may only be among those members of a society who have neither the opportunity nor the ability to produce primary food resources that the collapse of administrative hierarchies is a clear disaster.
Among those less specialized, severing the ties that link local groups to a regional entity is often attractive.
Collapse then is not intrinsically a catastrophe.
It is a rational, economizing process that may well benefit much of the population.
One ambiguity in this view is the major loss of population that sometimes accompa- vies collapse.
The Maya are a classic case in point.
How advantageous can the Maya collapse have been if it resulted in major population loss?
In fact, as the work of Sidrys and Berger (1979) shows, the relationship between Maya collapse and population loss is unclear.
It is not certain that these phenomena were coeval (especially since the collapse took decades to overcome all centers), nor even that the Lowland population loss does not reflect emigration to peripheral areas.
With these ambiguities unresolved, discussions of cause and effect are premature.
In any event, nothing in the preceding paragraphs implies that human actions always achieve, in the long-term, a desirable outcome.
Even if the Mayan collapse proved detrimental to the survival of large parts of the population in the long-run, this need not mean that in the short-term collapse was not an economizing process.
In fact, there are indications that leveling or actual decline of population may often precede collapse, even by several centuries.
Such patterns have been discussed for both the Roman and Mayan cases.
Recent research indicates a similar trend at the great Mississippian center of Cahokia.
Population in this region apparently had peaked by ca.
1150 A.D., and declined until the final collapse 250 years later (Milner 1986).
Must every complex society endure this process?
Does investment in complexity always come to the point where the marginal return declines?
Modern economic research would not yield a clear answer to that question.
The argument made here is only that, where this process is operative and continues unchecked, a society will be thereby made vulnerable to collapse.
Certainly it would seem that to the extent less costly organizational solutions are chosen before more expensive ones, the need to add organizational
features must regularly yield a declining marginal return.
Yet among societies with the necessary capital, technological springboard, and economic and demographic incentives, obtaining a new energy subsidy (through empirebuilding or by exploiting a new energy source), or economic development, can for a time either reverse a declining marginal curve, or at least provide the wealth to finance it.
Renfrew (1972: 36-7) makes precisely this point in regard to the evolution of complexity in Greece and the Aegean.
It must be admitted that this approach removes much of the mystery of collapse, and identifies it as a mundane economic matter.
It is, as Finley would say, `...neither a dramatic nor a romantic way to look at...the great cataclysms of history.
One could not make a film out of it' (1968: 161).
Further implications of declining marginal returns It may seem from this work that archaeology is campaigning to displace economics as the `dismal science.'
Of course, the marginal product curve is nothing new.
It was developed to characterize changing cost/benefit curves in resource extraction, and input/output ratios in the manufacturing sector.
The idea of diminishing returns to economic activity is at least as old as the nineteenth-century classical economists: Thomas Malthus, David Ricardo, and John Stuart Mill (Barnett and Morse 1963: 2).
It applies, as seen in Chapter 4, to subsistence agriculture, minerals and energy production, information processing, and to many features of sociopolitical organiza tion.
Wittfogel (1955, 1957) applied the concept of `administrative returns' to the extension of government into economic affairs in `Oriental Despotisms.'
Lattimore (1940) accounted for the Chinese dynastic cycle in terms of increasing and declining returns.
It seems that Kroeber's (1957) observations on the `fulfillment' of art styles may refer to a situation where innovation within a style becomes increasingly difficult to achieve, leading to repetition and rearrangement of earlier work, and ultimately to a new style in which innovation is more easily attained.
The phenomenon is not at all limited to the human species.
Animal predators seem to follow the principle of marginal returns in their selection of environmental patches in which to forage (Charnov 1976;
Krebs 1978: 45-8).
That familiar explanation of collapse - the peasant revolt (see Chapter 3) - deserves comment here.
It seems insufficient to suggest that peasants revolt due to an unfair level of taxation, for cases can be presented (e.g., the Maya) where a peasantry endured exacting demands for
centuries.
What seems more likely to be pertinent is the marginal return on such support, and more particularly, any pattern of significant decline in this return.
Peasant political action would be substantially more intelligible in this light.
In modern peasant revolts, of course, other factors are involved, such as an intelligentsia adhering to an international ideology who are able to make peasantry aware of their marginal status.
In any event, mere taxation level is an insufficient explanation of peasant action in this area.
Some concept of cost/benefit ratios is required.
Gordon Childe had some pertinent observations on the matter:
...the instability of these [early] empires discloses a contradiction within them; the persistence with which the subject peoples revolted is a measure of their gratitude for the benefits [of empires], and perhaps the latter's value too.
Presumably the benefits were more than outweighed by disabilities.
In reality an empire of the Sargon type probably did directly destroy more wealth than it indirectly created (1951: 185).
Among his many astute observations, Polybius suggested that the triumph of Rome over Carthage was due to the fact that the former was increasing in power and the latter declining when they came into conflict.
In a somewhat similar vein, Elman Service applied his `Law of Evolutionary Potential' to suggest that older, established states become fossilized, unable to adopt innovations, and are thus outcompeted by newer, if smaller, peripheral peoples.
It would be worthwhile for historians to investigate the marginal return on organizational investment that such competitors experience.
An older, established state is likely to be investing in so many cumulative organizational features that its marginal return
on these investments has begun to decline, leaving lower and lower reserves with which to contain stress surges.
It is then understandable that such a nation is outcompeted by less complex peoples, who invest in little but warfare and experience a favorable return on that investment.
Polybius' views on Rome and Carthage, seen thus, might be extended to Rome's conquest of so many older, established states and confederations about the eastern Mediterranean.
The question that logically comes next is why the pattern seen in later Roman history has not subsequently been repeated.
Why has there been no sociopolitical collapse in Europe since the fall of the Western Empire?
This question can be fully answered only by a major treatise, but it is profitable at this point to sketch some factors worth investigating.
There are significant differences in the evolutionary histories of societies that have emerged as isolated, dominant states, and those that have developed as interacting sets of what Renfrew (1982: 286-9) has called `peer polities' and B. Price has labeled `clusters' (1977).
Renfrew's term is appropriately descriptive.
Peer polities are those like the Mycenaean states, the later small citystates of the Aegean and the Cyclades, or the centers of the Maya Lowlands, that interact on an approximately equal level.
As Renfrew and Price make clear, the evolution of such clusters of peer polities is conditioned not by some dominant neighbor, but more usually by their own mutual interaction, which may include both exchange and conflict.
In competitive, or potentially competitive, peer polity situations the option to collapse to a lower level of complexity is an invitation to be dominated by some other member of the cluster.
To the extent that such domination is to be avoided, investment in organizational complexity
must be maintained at a level comparable to one's competitors, even if marginal returns become unfavorable.
Complexity must be maintained regardless of cost.
Such a situation seems to have characterized the Maya, whose individual states developed as peer polities for centuries, and then collapsed within a few decades of each other (Sabloff 1986).
The post-Roman states of Europe have experienced an analogous situation, especially since the demise of the Carolingian Empire.
European history of the past 1500 years is quintessentially one of peer polities interacting and competing, endlessly jockeying for advantage, and striving to either expand at a neighbor's expense or avoid having the neighbor do likewise.
Collapse is simply not possible in such a situation unless all members of the cluster collapse at once.
Barring this, any failure of a single polity will simply lead to expansion of another, so that no loss of complexity results.
The costs of such a competitive system, as among the Maya, must be met by each polity, however unfavorable the marginal return.
As Renfrew pointed out for the Cyclades, `The specific state is legitimised in the eves of its citizens by the existence of other states which patently do function along comparable lines' (1982:
289 [emphasis in original]).
Peasant political action in such a situation is most logically aimed at reformation rather than decomposition.
Where the failure of a polity would simply mean for peasants domination by some other, equivalent regime, withdrawal and apathy are meaningless.
The political course followed by European peasants and other disaffected classes, under these constraints, was to increase participation, to expand their share of the decision-making process, and to secure thereby a more favorable return on organizational investment.
A point worth noting for
Marxists, in this regard, is that class conflict led to political evolution only when the less costly option collapse - was removed.
While this brief discussion cannot fully explain these elements of European political history, the points made here are worth further investigation.
Most likely it is no coincidence that forms of participatory government emerged in both the ancient world (Greece, Republican Rome) and the recent one under situations of peer polity competition.
The Warring States period of China, following the collapse of the Western Chou, offers an interesting contrast.
Here a situation of peer polity competition (the Warring States), prior to the unification by the Ch'in, led to the development (by such thinkers as Confucius and Mo Tzu) of an ideology of good government and protection of the populace.
Good rulers were thought to receive the Mandate of Heaven, and continued to enjoy this Mandate so long as they governed well.
Cessation of good government, or a series of catastrophes, were signs that a dynasty had lost the Mandate of Heaven.
A new dynasty would soon emerge that claimed the Mandate had devolved on it (Creel 1953;
Fairbank et al.
In ancient China, then, peer polity competition evolved with an ideology of protecting the populace, rather than leading to participatory government.
Perhaps participatory government was simply not possible in ancient societies that were so much larger, demographically and territorially, than the Greek citystates.
At this point we arrive at the first step toward understanding the difference between societies that slowly disintegrate and those that rapidly collapse.
The Byzantine and Ottoman empires are classic examples of the former.
Both gradually lost power and territory to competitors.
There was in this process no collapse - no sudden loss of complexity - for each episode of weakness by these empires was simply met by expansion of their neighbors.
Herein lies an important principle of collapse (and the final installment in its definition).
Collapse occurs, and can only occur, in a power vacuum.
Collapse is possible only where there is no competitor strong enough to fill the political vacuum of disintegration.
Where such a competitor does exist there can be no collapse, for the competitor will expand territorially to administer the population left leaderless.
Collapse is not the same thing as change of regime.
Where peer polities interact collapse will affect all equally, if and when it occurs, provided that no outside competitor is powerful enough to absorb all.
Here, then, is the reason why the Mayan and Mycenaean centers collapsed simultaneously.
No mysterious invaders captured each of these polities in an improbable series of fairy-tale victories.
As the Mayan and Mycenaean petty states became respectively locked into competitive spirals, each had to make ever greater investments in military strength and organizational complexity.
As the marginal return on these investments declined, no polity had the option to simply withdraw from the spiral, for this would have led to absorption by a neighbor.
Collapse for such clusters of peer polities must be essentially simultaneous, as together they reach the point of economic exhaustion.
Since in both cases no outside dominant power (in the Mesoamerican Highlands or the eastern Mediterranean) was both close enough and strong enough to take advantage of this exhaustion, collapse proceeded without external interference and lasted for centuries.
(Later Greek citystates, by contrast, were confronted with powerful neighbors who would take advantage of a political vacuum, and so lacked the option of collapse.)
Here too is the final reason why, as raised in Chapter 5, the Eastern Roman Empire could not collapse as did that of the West.
Disintegration of the Byzantine state would have simply resulted in the expansion of its peer - the Sassanian Empire (as, throughout its history, Byzantine weakness always led to expansion of its rivals).
There was no possibility in the eastern Mediterranean for a drop to lower complexity commensurate to what happened in the power vacuum of western Europe in the fifth century A.D. The occurrence of declining marginal returns, then, need not always lead to collapse: it will do so only where there is a power vacuum.
In other cases it is more likely to be a source of political and military weakness, leading to slow disintegration and/or change of regime.
Lewis' (1958) observations on the decline of the Ottoman Empire, and R. McC.
Adams'(1978, 1981) on replacement of the Sassanian by the Islamic regime in Persia, both illustrate this process.
Toynbee's account of the role of the Romano-Bulgarian War (977-1019 A.D.)
in the Byzantine loss at the Battle of Manzikert (1071) (discussed in Chapter 3) shows clearly that the Byzantine conquest of the Bulgars was achieved at very high cost, for low return, and weakened the Byzantine state (Toynbee 1962 (IV): 371-2, 392, 398-402).
Suggestions for further applications
Is a pattern of declining marginal returns the sole reason for collapse?
Do complex societies collapse for no other cause?
Since it is not certain that all cases of collapse have yet occurred, such questions cannot be decided with finality.
Nuclear war, for example, is probably capable of causing collapse, and does not fall under the category of marginal returns.
At this point it can be said, on the basis of the discussion in Chapter 3, that no other existing theory can by itself account for the phenomenon, and on the basis of Chapter 5, that major instances of collapse are well clarified by the present theory.
The marginal return on investment in complexity is at present the best explanation of collapse.
At this point the discussion will focus on some cases of collapse that are not as well known as those discussed in Chapter 5, but for which there are presently suggestions that declining marginal returns may have been involved.
The purpose of this discussion is to suggest directions for future research.
Those cases not discussed are left out because available data are too scanty for this purpose, not because some other explanation better fits them.
Chou China.
The increasing costliness of ensuring loyalty of feudal officials seems to have coincided with an upswing in barbarian incursions.
There was thus a pattern of increasing costs of integration and of containing stress surges, imposed on a situation where returns for such costs may not have increased at all.
Chinese dynasties have as a rule seemed to undergo deteriorating cost/benefit ratios from their founding to their demise.
Old Babylonian period.
Despite the loss of dependencies during the reign of Samsuiluna, the crown attempted nonetheless to maintain the level of administration established previously.
Marginal returns decline axiomatically in an attempt to govern a smaller land area and population with an administration designed for a larger territory.
Third Dynasty of UrlSassanian period.
As R. McC.
Adams has described (1981), these were periods in Mesopotamian history when maximizing regimes attempted to increase production by expanding into marginal lands, and by intensive irrigation.
This was done regardless of how returns declined relative to costs, for the purpose was to secure every last possible bit of production.
Old Kingdom Egypt.
A coincidence of several factors increasing feudal independence, declining power of the king, increasing establishment of tax-exempt funerary endowments, increased monumental construction in the Sixth Dynasty, and possible Nile unreliability - may have combined to yield a central administration that was increasingly costly while it was decreasingly wealthy and powerful.
The possibility of output failure (Easton 1965b:
230), in the king's inability to secure favorable Nile floods, would have contributed to the perception of a declining marginal return.
Harappans.
It is not known whether the entire Harappan territory was politically unified.
If it was not, then it is possible that competitive relations among Harappan polities was a source of declining marginal returns.
Current research suggests that there were indeed several independent Harappan states (Possehl 1982).
Hittites.
The expansion policy that led to the establishment of the Hittite Empire achieved success only after generations of struggle.
The costliness of this expansion may have left the Hittites vulnerable to the Kaska tribes, and to other less complex peoples, who seem to have been involved in toppling the empire.
Mycenaeans.
As suggested previously, it is possible that the Mycenaeans, a cluster of peer polities, engaged in the same kind of competitive spiral that characterized other peer polity systems - later Greek city-states, ancient and medieval Italian city-states, post-Roman Europe, Warring States China, and the Maya.
As among the Maya, the upwardly-driven costs of such a system, without any real benefits at the local level, would have induced declining marginal returns.
Unlike China, where large territories and vast populations repaid conquest and unification, successful competition by any Mycenaean polity would yield little real return.
The result was probably constant investment in defense, military administration, and petty warfare, with any single polity rarely experiencing a significant return on that investment.
Mauryan Empire.
This empire has not been previously discussed, except for a brief reference in Chapter 3.
It was established in northern India in the fourth century B.C., in response to the conquests of Alexander.
By 272 B.C. it included almost the entire Indian subcontinent.
Yet it lasted less than a century, and by 180 B.C. was gone.
Subsequent empires never achieved the same scale.
The breakup began after the death of Ashoka (232 B.C.), and one authority cites economic pressures.
Vast revenues were needed to maintain the army, pay the salaries of officials, and settle newly claimed land.
The Mauryans paid for this, in the later empire, by debasement of their currency (Thapar 1966: 70-91).
This strategy sounds reminiscent of
the Roman and Ottoman empires, both of which debased coinage to pay for declining marginal returns.
Monte Alban.
Blanton (1978, 1983), as discussed in Chapter 3, argues that the population of the Valley of Oaxaca ceased to support the hierarchy at Monte Alban when it became ineffectual at dealing with disputes, and no longer necessary as a defense against Teotihuacan.
If so, then the Oaxacan people acted in an expectable manner when they perceived an insufficient return on complexity.
Hohokam.
As described by D. Adams (1983: 37), Fred Plog and Charles Merbs recently excavated 36 Hohokam burials dating from the fourteenth century, not long before that society's collapse.
A significant amount of malnutrition was evident.
This is a sparse fact indeed, but it suggests that for the Hohokam it might be worthwhile to investigate declining returns to the population for investment in complexity.
Jill Neitzel has recently proposed that peripheral communities withdrew from the Hohokam system when the costs of participation exceeded the benefits (1984).
Huari.
Huari appears to have invested in a major cultural transformation of the lands under its control.
It imposed economic, social, and cultural changes.
Major urban centers that included Huari building complexes were established in each valley.
Ceramic styles were transformed.
Goods and information were exchanged across the central Andes at unprecedented levels.
It has been suggested that urbanism and militarism, state distribution of foodstuffs, the Andean road system, and the spread of the Quechua language began with the Huari Empire.
Huari may thus have initiated the investment in these transformations, so that the later Inca had merely to reestablish the pattern and thus derive a higher marginal return.
For the Huari, the set-up costs
of imperial rule may have been excessively high compared to the benefits.
Less complex societies.
Sahlins (1963, 1968) and Leach (1954) have argued that in simpler societies investment in political expansion, with insufficient return to the local level, engenders disaffection and collapse.
Turnbull (1978) has explained the Ik collapse as abandonment of a level of complexity that, while minimal, could yield no return on investment.
Hunters and gatherers, as is well known, collapse into minimal foraging units (families) when resource or social stress makes large, complex gatherings impossible.
Declining marginal returns, in general, can arise from any of the following conditions:
benefits constant, costs rising;
benefits rising, costs rising faster;
benefits falling, costs constant; or 4.
benefits falling, costs rising.
In undertaking to study the collapse of any complex society, these conditions should be looked for.
Declining marginal returns and other theories of collapse The extent to which a global theory is illuminating or trivial depends, in part, on its ability to clarify matters that were previously obscure, on its flexibility in application, and on its power to incorporate less general explanations.
The perspective of declining marginal returns has indeed clarified the collapse process and shown itself highly flexible in application: three major, very different cases can be understood by it, and in this chapter it-has been shown that a variety of other collapses are, with present information, potentially clarified.
As a very general principle, the application of this framework to specific cases cannot be automatic or mechanical.
Each society that has collapsed has done so under a set of circumstances that were at least partially unique.
The application of a general principle to such diversity requires different considerations in each case, including sensitivity to the peculiar circumstances of local histories.
The principle of declining marginal returns has the capacity logically to incorporate the explanatory themes discussed in Chapter 3.
One exception to this may be the Mystical theme, which is difficult to incorporate in any scientific theory.
Even so, some of the individual approaches of the Mystical theme may prove to be subsumable under declining marginal returns, as will be shown.
Resource depletion.
The essence of depletion arguments is the gradual or rapid loss of at least part of a necessary resource base, whether due to agricultural mismanagement,
environmental fluctuation, or loss of trade networks.
Major weaknesses of the approach are: why steps are not taken to halt the approaching weakness; and why resource stress leads to collapse in one case and economic intensification in another.
Consideration here must be given to the cost of further economic intensification projected against the marginal benefits to be gained.
If the marginal utility of further economic development is too low, and/or if a society is already economically weakened by a low marginal return, then collapse in such instances would be understandable.
Collapse is not understandable, under resource stress, without reference to characteristics of the society, most particularly its position on a marginal return curve.
A society already experiencing a declining marginal return may not be able to capitalize the economic development that is often a response to resource stress.
New resources.
The most general statement of this theme has been given by Harper (1970), who argues that new resources can alleviate shortages and inequities, ending the need for ranking and complexity.
This can be squarely subsumed under declining marginal returns: when a system of ranking and complexity is no longer needed, continued support of it would yield a declining return, and so it is likely to be dropped.
Catastrophes.
Catastrophe theories suffer from the same flaw as resource depletion arguments.
Why, when complex social systems are designed to handle catastrophes and routinely do, would any society succumb?
If any society has ever succumbed to a single-event catastrophe, it must have been a disaster of truly colossal magnitude.
Otherwise, the inability of a society to recover from perturbation must be attributable to economic weakness, resulting quite plausibly from declining marginal returns.
Insufficient response to circumstances.
The `failure to adapt' model relies on a value judgement: that complex societies are preferable to simpler ones, so that their disappearance must indicate an insufficient response.
It ignores the possibility that, due to declining marginal returns, collapse may be an economical and highly appropriate adjustment.
One major theory under this theme, Service's `Law of Evolutionary Potential,' has been shown earlier in this chapter to be subsumable under the principle of declining marginal returns.
Conrad and Demarest's (1984) study shows how the Aztec and Inca empires reached the point of diminishing returns for expansion, and declined accordingly.
Other theories grouped under this theme are not plausibly linked to collapse.
Other complex societies.
Blanton's argument that Monte Alban collapsed when it was no longer necessary for some tasks (deterrence of Teotihuacan) nor efficient at others (adjudication of disputes), is fully compatible with the marginal return principle.
Monte Alban collapsed, in other words, when the return it could offer became too low relative to support costs.
In regard to inter-polity competition, John Hicks once suggested that `...when the ability to expand is lost, the ability to recover from disasters may go too' (1969: 59).
The ability to expand may be lost due to an economic weakness, or else where the cost of expansion becomes too high relative to advantages.
The latter will occur where one complex society impinges on another (e.g., Rome and Persia), and the marginal return for conquest and administration is too low.
Intruders.
The scenario of tribal peoples toppling great empires presents a major explanatory puzzle.
What characteristics of the less complex society and/or what weaknesses in the more complex one could lead to such a circumstance?
Service, as noted, ascribed this to his Law
of Evolutionary Potential, which as pointed out can be subsumed under the principle of declining marginal returns.
As discussed in regard to the ideas of Polybius and Service, a more powerful state may not prevail against a weaker one if the latter is ascending a marginal return curve and the former descending.
A complex society that is investing heavily in many cumulative organizational features, with low marginal return, may have little or no reserve for containing stress surges.
Such a state may compete inefficiently with a population that is smaller, and on paper weaker, but that invests in little but highreturn military ventures.
Conflict/contradictions/mismanagement.
It was argued earlier in this chapter that peasant political action is less likely to occur under a high but static tax load than in a situation where a high tax load is yielding a perceptibly declining return to the local level.
In such a situation inequity becomes obvious.
Similarly, class conflict is more likely a matter of a falling than a rising marginal return.
In the former situation individuals and groups, as discussed in Chapter 4, position themselves to reap maximum share of a shrinking economic pie.
In a case where the marginal return is rising, class conflict may be forestalled by creating the impression that opportunity for improvement exists for all classes.
Cases where elites behave irrationally require explanation.
Irrational behavior by itself explains little of history.
Service made the astute observation that the success or irrationality of elite behavior is probably a function of circumstance-induced perception.
Rulers simply look good during successful periods, and vice versa (Service 1975: 312).
The biologist Garrett Hardin once pointed to a disarmingly simple lesson of systems analysis that has powerful implications: `We can never do merely one thing' (1968: 457 [emphasis in original]).
His point was that good intentions are virtually irrelevant in determining the result of altering a large, complex system.
With the feedback relationships inherent in such a system, one can almost never anticipate the full consequences of any alteration.
The same principle applies to misbehavior: elite mismanagement can be only partly responsible for the evolution of any complex society.
I do not wish to suggest that leadership is immaterial, only that it is of much less importance than many believe.
Complex societies do not evolve on the whims of individuals.
Circumstance-induced perception is likely to be of greater consequence: rulers look good when the marginal return on investment in complexity is rising, for in such a situation almost anything a leader does is overshadowed by the large payoff to society-wide investment.
Conversely, when marginal returns are declining there is usually very little that leadership can do in the short term to arrest this trend, and so anything that is tried is bound to appear incompetent.
Social dysfunction.
This vague theme is somewhat diverse, but its central concern seems to be with mysterious internal processes that prevent either integration or proper adaptation.
Little understanding is gained by such ethereal notions.
Much more would be learned by focusing on the costs and benefits of adopting complex social features.
Mystical.
The mystical theme is difficult to incorporate under any scientific approach, but some of the individual studies grouped under this theme can be subsumed under the principle of declining marginal returns.
David Stuart, for
example, asserts that complex societies experience cyclical oscillations between more and less complex forms (which he labels `powerful' and `efficient').
The mystical nature of Stuart's formulation emerges when he cannot account for these oscillations, except to liken complex societies to insect swarms and to suggest that they `burn out' (Stuart and Gauthier 1981: 10-11).
Why do Stuart's `powerful' societies revert to `efficient' ones?
The answer is most likely that they do so because, as complex societies, they experience a declining marginal return on investment in complexity, and so become liable to collapse.
Many of the scenarios under the Mystical theme rely on the growth and senescence analogy, or on such value-laden concepts as `vigor' and `decadence.'
In one way these scenarios are like the elite mismanagement theme: societies are rated by their success at dealing with circumstances, or at expansion.
Societies able to do these things are considered `vigorous,' and those unable `decadent.'
Circumstance-induced perception is a major factor in these assessments.
A society experiencing high marginal returns on investment in complexity is likely to be capable of expanding or of containing stress surges, and will appear `vigorous' and `growing.'
A society in the phase of declining marginal returns is likely to be less capable in these matters, and so appear `decadent.'
The concepts of 'growth/senescence' and `vigor/decadence' are vitalistic and subjective.
Such value-laden terms, and related concepts, are best dropped from use.
The observations on which they rely, however, can be subsumed under the principle of marginal returns.
`Moral weakness' (whatever that may he) is more likely to be ascribed to a society experiencing declining than increasing marginal returns.
Moreover, as Borkenau has noted, moral crimes are committed all the time by both `vigorous' and `decadent' societies (1981: 51).
Chance concatenation of events.
Chance concatenations cannot explain collapse, except where combinations of deleterious circumstances impinge -)n a society already economically weakened.
Economic explanations.
The themes that unite economic explanations are declining advantages to complexity, increasing disadvantages to complexity, and/or increasing costliness of complexity.
Such ideas are clearly subsumable under declining marginal returns, and indeed this principle provides the global applicability previously lacking in economic explanations.
On a more general level this principle unites both internal/external theories of change, and conflict/integration models of society.
Declining marginal returns are an internal aspect of any society, following their own dynamic pattern.
This pattern is based on the propensity to choose less costly organizational solutions before more costly ones.
Yet changes in organizational solutions and marginal returns often result from the need to respond to changing external conditions.
Conflict and integration theories are also subsumed, for whether a people are the beneficiaries or the victims of complexity, it is necessary to take into account the cost/benefit ratio of organizational investment.
Neither benign nor repressive regimes can long endure a siege of declining marginal returns (although repressive regimes may be able to endure somewhat longer).
The principle of declining marginal returns is indeed, then, capable of incorporating these various approaches to collapse (or at least the more worthwhile parts of these).
It provides an overarching theoretical framework that unites diverse approaches, and it shows where connections
exist among disparate views.
It seems from this discussion that a significant range of human behavior, and a number of social theories, are clarified by this principle.
Contemporary conditions
A study of this topic must at some point discuss implications for contemporary societies, not only as a matter of social responsibility, but also because the findings point so clearly in that direction.
Complex societies historically are vulnerable to collapse, and this fact alone is disturbing to many.
Although collapse is an economic adjustment, it can nevertheless be devastating where much of the population does not have the opportunity or the ability to produce primary food resources.
Many contemporary societies, particularly those that are highly industrialized, obviously fall into this class.
Collapse for such societies would almost certainly entail vast disruptions and overwhelming loss of life, not to mention a significantly lower standard of living for the survivors.
The contemporary concern with collapse has been mentioned in Chapter 1.
Surely much of the public fascination with lost civilizations derives from the vicarious threat implicit in such knowledge.
`We are aware,' wrote the noted French social philosopher Paul Valery, `that a civilization has the same fragility as a life' (1962: 23).
Indeed this concern is sometimes extended to the very survival of the human species.
Astrophysicists are currently developing a theory suggesting that the cyclic return of a distant star toward earth triggers immense comet showers that periodically wipe out multiple life forms, and will so affect the human race at the next pass (Perlman 1984).
Other scenarios for contemporary collapse include: nuclear war and associated climatic changes;
increasing atmospheric pollution, leading to ozone depletion, climatic changes, saturation of global circulation patterns, and similar disasters; depletion of critical industrial resources; general economic breakdown, brought on by such things as unrepayable national and international debts, disruptions in fossil fuel availability, hyperinflation, and the like.
Faced with such an array of imposing problems, and constantly bombarded with media attention to these and other dilemmas, people are naturally concerned.
For reasons that are more or less rational, a respectable segment of the population of Western industrial societies fears that one or several of these factors will bring a breakdown and a new dark age.
Only a veneer of complexity lies between us and the primordial chaos, it is thought, the Hobbesian warof-all-against-all.
A considerable level of political activity results from such fears, and both national priorities and international policies are to a significant degree influenced by this popular concern.
Some people store food or dig fallout shelters, in expectation of the failure of a political process to resolve the situation.
Others go to greater lengths, stockpiling weapons and conducting paramilitary training, even engaging in military games, in anticipation of the day when the ghost of Hobbes emerges, when we are all reduced to the conditions of the Ik.
A not inconsequential market has arisen from this, including survivalist books and magazines, and an industry that features such post-collapse necessities as weapons, survival implements, and freeze-dried food.
Many of those who are less extreme have nevertheless in recent times
become concerned with raising one's own food, making one's own clothing, and building shelter.
Magazines that focus on such subjects as organic gardening contain articles and advertisements extolling the virtues of a lifestyle that reduces one's dependence on an ultimately unreliable industrial economy.
It is easy to overemphasize such matters, for only a small part of the population is actively preparing for collapse.
On the other hand, no educated person who is aware of historical collapses can escape occasionally wondering about current conditions.
I do not wish, by clinically treating such concerns as a social phenomenon, to downplay their validity.
Excepting some of the more extreme views, there may indeed be reason for alarm.
Certainly none can argue that industrialism will not someday have to deal with resource depletion and its own wastes.
The major question is how far off that day is.
The whole concern with collapse and self-sufficiency may itself be a significant social indicator, the expectable scanning behavior of a social system under stress, in which there is advantage to seeking lower-cost solutions.
A colleague with whom I corresponded about this work inquired (facetiously I assume) whether it would be finished before our own civilization collapses.
As in the study of historical collapses, those concerned about current conditions have ignored the principle of marginal returns on investment in complexity.
Whether industrial civilization will he destroyed in a nuclear war or in a cosmic collision is guesswork, and not of concern here.
What can be presently addressed are matters that are known to be of importance to all societies: the costs of, and benefits from, investment in complexity.
Some of the data discussed in Chapter 4 are certainly disturbing in this regard.
Patterns of declining marginal
returns can be observed in at least some contemporary industrial societies in the following areas: agriculture; minerals and energy production; research and development; investment in health; education; government, military, and industrial management; productivity of GNP for producing new growth; and some elements of improved technical design.
A few caveats are in order about such trends.
The examples of declining marginal returns, here and in Chapter 4, were chosen eclectically, to illustrate the contention that complex societies regularly experience such trends.
These are only examples, not a rigorous examination of any modern economy.
Such observations are not a full monitor of the marginal return that any particular society is experiencing overall on investment in complexity.
There may be favorable countertrends in some spheres, perhaps such as microprocessor technology.
Yet there can be no denying the disquieting nature of the statistics in Chapter 4.
It is clear that at least some industrial societies are now experiencing declining marginal returns in several crucial and costly spheres of investment.
There are two opposing reactions to such trends.
On the one hand there are a number of economists who, despite the reputation of their discipline for pessimism, believe that
we face, not real resource shortages, only solvable economic dilemmas.
They assume that with enough economic motivation, human ingenuity can overcome all obstacles.
Three quotations characterize this approach.
No society can escape the general limits of its resources, but no innovative society need accept Malthusian diminishing returns (Barnett and Morse 1963:
All observers of energy seem to agree that various energy alternatives are virtually inexhaustible (Gordon 1981: 109).
By allocation of resources to R&D, we may deny the Malthusian hypothesis and prevent the conclusion of the doomsday models (Sato and Suzawa 1983: 81).
In the contrary view, espoused by many environmental advocates, current well-being is bought at the expense of future generations.
If we do allocate more resources to R&D, and are successful at stimulating further economic growth, this will, in the environmentalist view, lead only to faster depletion, hasten the inevitable crash, and make it worse when it comes (e.g., Catton 1980).
Implicit in such ideas is a call for economic undevelopment, for return to a simpler time of lower consumption and local selfsufficiency.
Both views are held by well-meaning persons who have intelligently studied the matter and reached opposite conclusions.
Both approaches, though, suffer from the same flaw: key historical factors have been left out.
The optimistic approach will he addressed first on this point, the environmental view shortly.
Economists base their beliefs on the principle of infinite substitutability.
The basis of this principle is that by allocating resources to R&D, alternatives can be found to energy and raw materials in short supply.
So as wood, for example, has grown expensive, it has been replaced in many uses by masonry, plastics, and other materials.
One problem with the principle of infinite substitutability is that it does not apply, in any simple fashion, to investments in organizational complexity.
Sociopolitical organization, as we know, is a major arena of declining marginal returns, and one for which no substitute product can be developed.
Economies of scale and advances in information-processing technology do help lower organizational costs, but ultimately these too are subject to diminishing returns.
A second problem is that the principle of infinite substitutability is, despite its title, difficult to apply indefinitely.
A number of perceptive scientists, philosophers, and economists have shown that the marginal costs of research and development, as discussed in Chapter 4, have grown so high it is questionable whether technological innovation will be able to contribute as much to the solution of future problems as it has to past ones (D. Price 1963; Rescher 1978, 1980; Rifkin with Howard 1980; Scherer 1984).
Consider, for example, what will be needed to solve problems of food and pollution.
Meadows and her colleagues note that to increase world food production by 34 percent from 1951 to 1966 required increases in expenditures on tractors of 63 percent, on nitrate fertilizers of 146 percent, and on pesticides of 300 percent.
The next 34 percent increase in food production would require even greater capital and resource inputs (Meadows et al.
Pollution control shows a similar pattern.
Removal of all organic wastes from a
sugar-processing plant costs 100 times more than removing 30 percent.
Reducing sulfur dioxide in the air of a U.S. city by 9.6 times, or of particulates by 3.1 times, raises the cost of control by 520 times (Meadows et al.
It is not that R&D cannot potentially solve the problems of industrialism.
The difficulty is that to do so will require an increasing share of GNP.
The principle of infinite substitutability depends on energy and technology.
With diminishing returns to investment in scientific research, how can economic growth be sustained?
The answer is that to sustain growth resources will have to be allocated from other sectors of the economy into science and engineering.
The result will likely be at least a temporary decline in the standard of living, as people will have comparatively less to spend on food, housing, clothing, medical care, transportation, or entertainment.
The allocation of greater resources to science of course is nothing new, merely the continuation of a two centuries-old trend (D. Price 1963).
Such investment, unfortu nately, can never yield a permanent solution, merely a respite from diminishing returns.
In past societies, as we know, declining marginal returns led to weakness, and to disintegration or collapse.
If we are to escape nuclear annihilation, if we control pollution and population, and manage to circumvent resource depletion, will our fate then be sealed by the high cost and low marginal return that these things will require?
Will we find, as have some past societies, that the cost of overcoming our problems is too high relative to the benefits conferred, and that not solving problems is the economical option?
In fact, there are major differences between the current and the ancient worlds that have important implications for collapse.
One of these is that the world today is full.
That is to say, it is filled by complex societies; these occupy every sector of the globe, except the most desolate.
This is a new factor in human history.
Complex societies as a whole are a recent and unusual aspect of human life.
The current situation, where all societies are so oddly constituted, is unique.
It was shown earlier in this chapter that ancient collapses occurred, and could only occur, in a power vacuum, where a complex society (or cluster of peer polities) was surrounded by less complex neighbors.
There are no power vacuums left today.
Every nation is linked to, and influenced by, the major powers, and most are strongly linked with one power bloc or the other.
Combine this with instant global travel, and as Paul Valery noted, `...nothing can ever happen again without the whole world's taking a hand' (1962: 115 [emphasis in original] ).
Collapse today is neither an option nor an immediate threat.
Any nation vulnerable to collapse will have to pursue one of three options: (1) absorption by a neighbor or some larger state; (2) economic support by a dominant power, or by an international financing agency; or (3) payment by the support population of whatever costs are needed to continue complexity, however detrimental the marginal return.
A nation today can no longer unilaterally collapse, for if any national government disintegrates its population and territory will be absorbed by some other.
Although this is a recent development, it has analogies in past collapses, and these analogies give insight into current conditions.
Past collapses, as discussed, occurred among two kinds of international political situations: isolated, dominant states, and clusters of peer polities.
The isolated, dominant state went out with the advent of global travel and communication, and what remains now are competitive peer polities.
Even if today there are only two major peers, with allies grouped into opposing blocs, the dynamics of the competitive relations are the same.
Peer polities, such as postRoman Europe, ancient Greece and Italy, Warring States China, and the Mayan cities, are characterized by competitive relations, jockeying for position, alliance formation and dissolution, territorial expansion and retrenchment, and continual investment in military advantage.
An upward spiral of competitive investment develops, as each polity continually seeks to outmaneuver its peer(s).
None can dare withdraw from this spiral, without unrealistic diplomatic guarantees, for such would be only an invitation to domination by another.
In this sense, although industrial society (especially the United States) is sometimes likened in popular thought to ancient Rome, a closer analogy would be with the Mycenaeans or the Maya.
Peer polity systems tend to evolve toward greater complexity in a lockstep fashion as, driven by competition, each partner imitates new organizational, technological, and military features developed by its competitor(s).
The marginal return on such developments declines, as each new military breakthrough is met by some countermeasure, and so brings no increased advantage or security on a lasting basis.
A society trapped in a competitive peer polity system must invest more and more for no increased return, and is thereby economically weakened.
And yet the option of withdrawal or collapse does not exist.
So it is that collapse (from declining marginal returns) is not in the immediate future for any contemporary nation.
This is not, however, due so much to anything we have accomplished as it is to the competitive spiral in which we have allowed ourselves to become trapped.
Here is the reason why proposals for economic undevelopment, for living in balance on a small planet, will not work.
Given the close link between economic and military power, unilateral economic deceleration would be equivalent to, and as foolhardy as, unilateral disarmament.
We simply do not have the option to return to a lower economic level, at least not a rational option.
Peer polity competition drives increased complexity and resource consumption regardless of costs, human or ecological.
I do not wish to suggest by this discussion that any major power would be quickly in danger of collapse were it not for this situation.
Both the primary and secondary world powers have sufficient economic strength to finance diminishing returns well into the future.
As seen in the cases of the Romans and the Maya, peoples with sufficient incentives and/or economic reserves can endure declining marginal returns for centuries before their societies collapse.
(This fact, however, is no reason for complacency.
Modern evolutionary processes, as is well known, occur at a faster rate than those of the past.)
There are any number of smaller nations, though, that have invested quite heavily in military power out of proportion to their economic base, or in development projects with a questionable marginal payoff, that might well be vulnerable.
In the world today they will not be allowed to collapse, but will be bailed out either by a dominant partner or by an international financing agency.
Such instances lower the marginal return that the world as a whole experiences for its investment in complexity.
Peer polities then tend to undergo long periods of upwardly-spiraling competitive costs, and downward marginal returns.
This is terminated finally by domination of one and acquisition of a new energy subsidy (as in Republican
Rome and Warring States China), or by mutual collapse (as among the Mycenaeans and the Maya).
Collapse, if and when it comes again, will this time be global.
No longer can any individual nation collapse.
World civilization will disintegrate as a whole.
Competitors who evolve as peers collapse in like manner.
In ancient societies the solution to declining marginal returns was to capture a new energy subsidy.
In economic systems activated largely by agriculture, livestock, and human labor (and ultimately by solar energy), this was accomplished by territorial expansion.
Ancient Rome and the Ch'in of Warring States China adopted this course, as have countless other empire-builders.
In an economy that today is activated by stored energy reserves, and especially in a world that is full, this course is not feasible (nor was it ever permanently successful).
The capital and technology available must be directed instead toward some new and more abundant source of energy.
Technological innovation and increasing productivity can forestall declining marginal returns only so long.
A new energy subsidy will at some point be essential.
It is difficult to know whether world industrial society has yet reached the point where the marginal return for its overall pattern of investment has begun to decline.
The great sociologist Pitirim Sorokin believed that Western economies had entered such a phase in the early twentieth century (1957: 530).
Xenophon Zolotas, in contrast, predicts that this point will be reached soon after the year 2000 (1981: 102-3).
Even if the point of diminishing returns to our present form of industrialism has not yet been reached, that point will inevitably arrive.
Recent history seems to indicate that we have at least reached declining returns for our reliance on fossil fuels, and possibly for some raw materials.
A new energy subsidy is
necessary if a declining standard of living and a future global collapse are to be averted.
A more abundant form of energy might not reverse the declining marginal return on investment in complexity, but it would make it more possible to finance that investment.
In a sense the lack of a power vacuum, and the resulting competitive spiral, have given the world a respite from what otherwise might have been an earlier confrontation with collapse.
Here indeed is a paradox: a disastrous condition that all decry may force us to tolerate a situation of declining marginal returns long enough to achieve a temporary solution to it.
This reprieve must be used rationally to seek for and develop the new energy source(s) that will be necessary to maintain economic wellbeing.
This research and development must be an item of the highest priority, even if, as predicted, this requires reallocation of resources from other economic sectors.
Adequate funding of this effort should be included in the budget of every industrialized nation (and the results shared by all).
I will not enter the political foray by suggesting whether this be funded privately or publicly, only that funded it must be.
There are then notes of optimism and pessimism in the current situation.
We are in a curious position where competitive interactions force a level of investment, and a declining marginal return, that might ultimately lead to collapse except that the competitor who collapses first will simply be dominated or absorbed by the survivor.
A respite from the threat of collapse might be granted thereby, although we may find that we will not like to bear its costs.
If collapse is not in the immediate future, that is not to say that the industrial standard of living is also reprieved.
As marginal returns decline (a process ongoing even now), up to the point where a new energy
subsidy is in place, the standard of living that industrial societies have enjoyed will not grow so rapidly, and for some groups and nations may remain static or decline.
The political conflicts that this will cause, coupled with the increasingly easy availability of nuclear weapons, will create a dangerous world situation in the foreseeable future.
To a degree there is nothing new or radical in these remarks.
Many others have voiced similar observations on the current scene, in greater detail and with greater eloquence.
What has been accomplished here is to place contemporary societies in a historical perspective, and to apply a global principle that links the past to the present and the future.
However much we like to think of ourselves as something special in world history, in fact industrial societies are subject to the same principles that caused earlier societies to collapse.
If civilization collapses again, it will be from failure to take advantage of the current reprieve, a reprieve paradoxically both detrimental and essential to our anticipated future.
